There is a famous story about Einstein that he used to, you know, go think, think, think,
and then go for a walk, and like he would whistle and sometimes.
So I remember the first time I heard this story, I thought, how interesting is what
the coincidence that he, this came to him when he was whistling.
But in fact, it's not this is how it works in some sense that you have to prepare for it.
But then the moment it happens when you stop thinking, actually, so the moment of
discovery is the moment when thinking stops and you kind of, you kind of almost become
that truth that you're seeking.
The following is a conversation with Edward Frankel, one of the greatest living
mathematicians doing research on the interface of mathematics and quantum
physics with an emphasis on the Langland's program, which he describes as a grand
unified theory of mathematics.
He also is the author of love and math, the heart of hidden reality.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's Edward Frankel.
You open your book, Love and Math, with a question, how does one become a mathematician?
There are many ways that this can happen.
Let me tell you how it happened to me.
So how did it happen to you?
So first of all, I grew up in the Soviet Union.
In a small town near Moscow called Kolomna.
And I was a smart kid, you know, a school, but mathematics was probably my least
favorite subject, not because I couldn't do it.
I was, you know, a straight A student and I could do all the problems easily.
But I thought it was incredibly boring.
And since the only math I knew was what was presented at school, I thought that was it.
And I was like, what kind of boring subject is this?
So what I really liked was physics and especially quantum physics.
So I was buying, I would go to a bookstore and buy popular books about elementary
particles and atoms and things like that and read them, you know, devour them.
And so I thought my dream was to become a theoretical physicist and to delve into
this finer structure of the universe, you know.
So then something happened when I was 15 years old.
It turns out that a friend of my parents was a mathematician who was a professor
at the local college, it was a small college preparing educators and teachers.
It's a provincial town, imagine it's like 117 kilometers from Moscow, which
would be something like 70 miles, I guess.
You do the math.
I like how you remember the number exactly.
Yeah, it's not funny how we remember numbers.
So his name was Yevgeny Yevgenyovich Petrov.
And if this doesn't remind you of the great works of Russian literature that you
haven't read them.
Like War and Peace, you know, like with the patronymic names.
But this was all real.
This was all happening.
So my mom, one day, by chance, met Yevgeny Yevgenyovich and told him about me,
that I was a bright kid and interested in physics.
And he said, oh, I want to meet him.
I'm going to convert him into math.
And my mom was like, nah, math, he doesn't like mathematics.
So they said, OK, let's let's see what they can do.
So I went to see him.
So I'm about 15 and a bit, a bit arrogant, I would say, you know, like every
teenager.
So he says to me, so I hear that you are interested in physics and elementary
particles.
I was like, yeah, sure.
And so, for example, do you know about quarks?
And I said, yes, of course, I know about quarks.
Quarks are the, you know, constituents of particles like protons and neutrons.
And it was one of the greatest discoveries in theoretical physics in the 60s.
That those particles were not elementary, but in fact, had the smaller parts.
And he said, oh, so then you probably know representation theory of the group
as you three, like, as you worked.
So in fact, I wanted to know what was, what were the underpinnings of those theories?
I knew the story, I knew the narrative.
I knew kind of this basic story of what these particles look like.
But how did physicists come up with these ideas?
How were they able to theorize them?
And so I remember, you know, like it was yesterday.
So he pulls out a book and it's kind of like like a Bible, you know, like a
substantial book and he opens them, it's somewhere in the middle.
And there I see the diagrams that I saw in popular books.
But in popular books, there was no explanation.
And now I see all these weird symbols and equations.
It's clear that it is explained in there.
Oh, my God, he said, you think what they teach you at school is mathematics.
It's like, no, this is real mathematics.
So I was instantly converted.
That to understand the underpinnings of physical reality, you have to understand
what SU3 is.
You have to learn what are groups, what is group SU3, what are representations of
SU3. There was a coherent and beautiful.
I could appreciate the beauty even though I could not understand heads and tails of it.
But you were drawn to the methodology, the machinery of how such understanding could
be attained.
Well, in retrospect, I think what I was really craving was a deeper understanding.
And up to that point, the deepest that I could see was where there was diagrams.
But for that story that, you know, a proton consists of three quarks and the neutron
consists of three quarks and they're called up and down and so on.
But I didn't know that there was actually underneath beneath the surface.
There was this mathematical theory.
If you can just link, what drew you to quantum mechanics?
Is there some romantic notion of understanding the universe?
Well, what is interesting to you?
Is it the puzzle of it or is it like the philosophical thing?
Now I am looking back.
Yeah.
So whatever I say about Edward at 15, yeah, he's colored by my, you know, all my
experiences that happen in the meantime.
I should say for the people who may not know you, I think your book and your
presentations kind of revealed that that 15 year old is still in there somewhere.
Well, some of the joy, he's probably still here now.
Yeah, in some way.
Yeah, I think it was a joy of discovery and the joy of going deeper into the kind
of the, to the root, to the, so the deepest structures of the universe.
So the secrets, the secrets, and we may not discover all of them.
We may not be able to understand, but we're going to try and go as far and as deep as we can.
I think that's what was the motivating factor in this.
Yeah, there's this mystery.
There's this dark room and there's a few of these mathematical physicists.
They're able to shine a flashlight briefly into there.
I would, we'll talk about it, but it also kind of makes me sad that there's so
few of your kind that have the flashlight to look into the room.
It's interesting.
I don't think there are so few, to be honest, because I think I find a lot of
people are actually interested.
If you talk, if you talk to people, you know, like some people you wouldn't expect to be
interested in this from all walks of life, from people of all kinds of professions.
I tell them I'm a mathematician and they, I'm a mathematician.
Okay, so that's a separate story.
A lot of people, I think, have been traumatized by their experience in the math
classes.
We can talk about it later, but then they ask me what kind of research I do.
And I mentioned that I work on the interface of math and quantum physics and their eyes
light up and say, oh, quantum physics or like Einstein's relativity.
Oh, I'm really curious about it.
I watch this podcast or I watch that podcast, you know, and I've learned this.
It's like, what do you think about that?
So I actually find that actually physicists are doing a great job at educating the public,
so to speak, and in terms of popular books and videos and so on.
Mathematicians are behind, we're starting to catch up a little bit.
I've been starting last 10 years, but we're still behind.
But I think people are curious.
Science is still a very much, you know, something that people want to learn because
that's our kind of the best way we know to establish some sort of objective reality,
whatever that might be.
Yeah, and to figure out this whole puzzle, to figure out the secrets that the universe holds.
Things that we can agree on, kind of, you know, like, even though for me, at this point,
I always, you know, make an argument that our physical theories always change.
They get updated.
So you had Newton's theory of gravity, then Einstein's theory, you know, superseded it.
But in mathematics, it seems that theories don't change.
Pythagoras' theorem has been the same for the last 2,500 years.
X squared plus Y squared equals Z squared.
We don't expect that next year suddenly it will be Z cubed, you know.
So and so that, to me, is actually even more, hints even more at how much we are connected
to each other because Pythagoras' theory, if you think about it, or any other mathematical
theorem means the same thing to anyone in the world today, regardless of their cultural,
you know, upbringing, religion, you know, ideas, ideology, gender, whatever,
nationality, race, whatever, right?
And it has meant the same to everyone, everywhere, and most likely will mean the same.
So that's, to me, kind of an antidote to the kind of divisiveness that we sometimes
observe these days, where it seems that we can't agree on anything.
To the political complexity of 2 plus 2 equals 5 in George Orwell's 1984.
I was in the Soviet Union in 1984, and so in many ways, I see that it was present,
and the novel was present.
But we still have not found a dictator who would actually say 2 plus 2 equals 5 and would
demand their citizens to repeat that.
The night is still young.
Has not happened yet, okay?
But those feel like math and physics are both sneaking up to a deep truth from slightly
different angles, and you stand at the crossroads or at the intersection of the two.
It's interesting to ask, what do you think is the difference between physics and
mathematics in the way physics and mathematics look at the world?
There is actually an essential difference, which is that physicists are interested in
describing this universe, okay?
Mathematicians are interested in describing all possible mathematical universes, of which,
you know, in some of our work, I'm still considering myself more of a mathematician
than a physicist.
My first love for physics, not withstanding.
Mathematicians are, in a way, we have more diversity, if you might say.
So we are accepting, for instance, our universe has three spatial dimensions,
in one time dimension, right?
So what I mean is that.
Allegedly.
Absorbed, but that we can observe today, right?
So of course, there are theories where there are some hidden dimensions as well.
Well, let's just say observed, you observe dimensions.
So this tabletop has two dimensions because you can have two axes, two coordinate axes.
X and Y, but then there is also a third one to describe the space of this room.
And then there is a time dimension.
So realistic theories of physics have to be about spaces of three dimensions or space
times of four dimensions.
But mathematically, we are just as interested in theories in 10 spacetime dimensions or
11 or 25 or whatever, or, or infinite dimensional spaces, you know?
So that's the difference.
On the other hand, I have to give it to the physicists.
We don't have the same satisfaction that they have of having their theories confirmed
by an experiment.
We don't get to play with big machines like LHC in Geneva, a large
Adron Collider that recently discovered, you know, the Higgs boson and some other things.
For us, it's all like a mental exercise in some sense.
We do, we prove things by using rules of logic.
And that's our way of confirming, experimental confirmation, if you will.
But I think we kind of, I kind of envy a little bit, my friends physicists, that they,
they get to, they get to experience this sort of, this big toys, you know, and play with them.
But it does seem that sometimes as you've spoken about abstract mathematical concepts
map to reality, and it seems to happen quite a bit.
That's right.
So the mathematics is underpin physics, obviously.
It's a language, the book of nature, as Galileo famously said, is written in the
language of mathematics, and, and, you know, the, the letters in it are the circle
triangles and squares, and those who don't know the language, I'm paraphrasing, are
left to wander in a dark labyrinth.
That's a famous quote from Galileo, which is very true and has become even more
true more recently in theoretical physics in the most, in the most far out parts of
the theoretical physics that have to do with elementary particles in the, and as well as
the, the structure of the cosmos at the large scale.
What do you think of Max Tagmark who wrote the book, Mathematical Universe?
So do you think just lingering on that point, you think at the end of the day, the
future generations will all be mathematicians?
Meaning, meaning the ones that deeply understand the way the universe works at the core.
Is it just mathematics?
At the core of, you know, I would say mathematics is one half of the core.
So the book is called Love and Math.
Yeah.
Okay.
So these are the two pillars in my view.
In other words, you can't cover everything by math.
So mathematics gives you tools, it gives you a way, a kind of a clear vision.
But mathematics by itself is not enough for one to have a harmonious and balanced life.
You know, so I am suspicious of any theory that declares that everything is mathematics.
So math can generate things that are beautiful, but it can't explain why it's beautiful.
Math, you could say, is a way to discern patterns, to find regularities in the universe.
And both physical and mental universe, the mathematics explores the mind as much as it
explores the physical world around us.
And it helps us to find those patterns, which kind of, which makes our perception more
sophisticated, our ability to perceive things such as beauty, you know, and it sharpens our
ability to see, to see beauty, to understand beauty.
So our world becomes more complex from thinking that our, that our, that Earth is flat.
We go to realizing that it is round, that it's shaped as a sphere so that we can actually
travel around the Earth, you know, so there isn't a place where we hit the end, so to speak.
And then proceeding in the same vein, then Einstein's general relativity theory tells us that
our space time is not flat either.
This is much harder to, to imagine the bent, a bent three-dimensional or four-dimensional,
three-dimensional space or four-dimensional space time, because this idea that the space around
us is flat is so deeply entrenched.
And yet we know from this theory and from the experiments that have confirmed it,
that a ray of light bends around a star, as if being attracted by the, by the force of gravity.
But in fact, the force of gravity is the bending.
It's just that it's not only the bending of the space, it's also the bending of space time.
There is a curvature, not only between special, spatial dimensions.
The way parallels and meridians come together in a small scale, they look like perpendicular lines.
But if you zoom out, you see that the space are, they're curving the space.
They are, they are sort of the, the tracks along which the space gets curved.
That's, that's the, that would be the curvature of spatial dimensions.
But in fact, now throwing time, and one time, imagine a sphere which lives,
which has one of the meridians correspond to time, and they're less correspond to space.
I can't imagine it, but you can write, I can write a mathematical formula expressing that
curvature. And that's, in fact, that curvature is responsible for the force of gravity attraction
between the sort of simplest instantiation of it, attraction between two planets or between two human
beings. Yeah, the time, bending time, it's not very nice that what that theory did to time,
because it feels like the marching of time forward is fundamental to our human experience.
The arrow of time marching forward nicely seems to be the only way we can understand the universe.
And the fact that you can start up to now, up to now, there are people who claim that they can,
that they have, they possess other ways of experiencing it.
So truly can visualize messing with time?
Well, messing with time, but not necessarily messing with time, because one point of view is that,
you know, I think, who was it? I think William Blake, who wrote that eternity loves time production.
So one point of view is that it is eternity, which is fundamental, where time stands still,
which our mind conceptualizes as the time. So, but in fact, you know, it's not something mystical.
If you think about when you, about it, when you're really absorbed in something,
time does stand still. And then you look at the clock and it's like, oh my god,
two hours have passed. And it felt like a couple of seconds. When you are absorbed,
when you're in love, when you are passionate about something, when you're creating something,
you are, we lose ourselves and we lose the sense of time and space for that matter. You see,
so there is only that, which is happening, that creative process.
So I think that this, this is familiar to all of us.
And we may be actually the closest to the truth at that moment, to the truth.
And so then, so yes, so then there is a point of view that this is where we are, we are who we are,
at our sort of fundamental, at our fundamental level. And after that, the mind comes in
and tries to conceptualize it. It's like, oh, because I was writing something.
I was writing a book, I was painting this painting, or maybe I was watching this painting and got
totally absorbed in it. Or I fell in love with this person. That's what happened. But in the
moment when it's happening, you're not thinking about it. You're just there.
Yeah, we construct narratives around the set of memories that seem to have happened in sequence,
or at least that's the way we tell ourselves that. And we also have a bunch of weird human things,
like consciousness, and the experience of free will that we chose a set of actions as the time
unrolled forward. And we are intelligent, conscious agents making, taking those actions.
But what if all of that is just an illusion and a nice narrative, we tell ourselves.
That's a really difficult thing to internalize. And imagine that to make it really catch 22.
Imagine that our minds are set up in such a way that they can't approach the world
or experience otherwise. So in other words, to understand, to see that from a more
kind of all-encompassing point of view, we have to step out of the mind.
Well, I wonder what's the more honest way to look at things.
But I think we like to be, to play with time. I think we like to play with these experiences,
with all the drama of it, with all the memories, with all the tribulations.
I think we love it. We love it. Otherwise, we wouldn't be doing it.
I think the Earth loves it. The evolutionary process somehow loves it. Whatever this thing
that's being created here on Earth, it seems to like to create, like to allow its children to
play with certain truths that they hold, this subjective truths that are useful for the competition
or whatever this dance that we call life broadly define, not just humans.
And you know, I'm glad you mentioned that because what I find fascinating is that the greatest
scientists are on record saying that when they were making their discoveries,
they felt like children. So Isaac Newton said to myself, I only appeared as a child playing
on the seashore and every once in a while finding a prettier pebble or a prettier shell.
Whilst, I think he said something like the infinite ocean of knowledge
was lying before me, Alexander Grotendig, who probably was the greatest mathematician
of the second half of the 20th century, the French mathematician, Alexander Grotendig,
wrote that discovery is a privilege of a child. The child who is not afraid to be wrong once again,
to look like an idiot, you know, to try this and that, I'm paraphrasing, and go through trial and
error. That is for them, in other words, for them, that innocence of a child who is not afraid,
who has not yet been told that it cannot be done. Okay. That was essential to scientific pursuit,
to scientific discovery. And now also compared to Pablo Picasso, a great artist, right? So who said
every child is an artist. The question is to how to preserve that as we grow up.
Do you struggle with that? You're one of the most respected
mathematicians in the world. You're Berkeley, you're like, there's a statue, you're supposed to be
very like, you know... Every tower. Sometimes I joke, I say, I take an elevator to the top of
the ivory tower every day, yeah. You're supposed to speak like royalty. Do you struggle to strip
all of that away to rediscover the child when you're thinking about problems when you're teaching,
when you're thinking about the world? Absolutely. I mean, that's part of being human,
because when we grow up, I mean, all of them, all of these great scientists, I think they were so
great in part because they were able to maintain that connection, okay, that fascination, that
vulnerability, that spontaneity, you know, and kind of looking at the world through the eyes of a
child. But it's difficult because, you know, you go through education system. And for many of us,
it's not especially helpful for maintaining that connection, that we kind of like,
we're being told certain things that we accept, take for granted, and so on, and little by little.
And also, we get hit every time we act different, okay, every time we act in a way that doesn't fit
sort of the pattern. We get punished by the teachers, get punished by parents, and so on.
And don't get respect when you act childlike in your thinking, when you are fearless and
looking like an idiot. That's right. Because there's a hierarchy.
Nobody wants to look like an idiot, you know, once you start growing up, or you think you're
growing up. Yeah. In the beginning, you don't even think of, you don't think in these terms.
You just play, you're just playing. And you are open to possibilities, to these infinite
possibilities that this world presents to us. So how do we, I'm not saying that
education system should not be also kind of taming that a little bit.
Obviously, the goal is balance that acquiring knowledge
so that we can be more mature and more discerning, more discriminating in terms of our approach
to the world, in terms of our connections to the world and people and so on. But how do we do that
while also preserving that innocence of a child? And my guess is that there is no formula for this.
It is a life is an answer. Every life, every human being is one particular answer to how do we find
balance? That's one imperfect approximation, approximate solution to the problem. But we can
look, we can look up to the great ones who have credentials in the sense that they have shown
and they have proved that they have done something that other humans appreciate,
our civilization appreciates, say Isaac Newton or Alexander Grottendijk or Pablo Picasso.
So they have established their right to speak about these matters and we cannot dismiss them
as mere madmen. They say, okay, well, if the same thing was said by somebody who never achieved
anything in their field of endeavor, it would be easy for us to dismiss it.
But when it comes from someone like Isaac Newton, we take notice. So I think that's
something important that they teach us. And especially today, in this age of AI,
of course, there's a big elephant in the room always, which is called AI. And so I know that
you are an expert in the subject. And we are going, we're living now in this very interesting times
of new AI systems coming online pretty much every couple of weeks. So I kind of, to me,
that whole debate about what is it? What is artificial intelligence? Where is it going?
What should we do about it? Needs an influx of this type of considerations that we've
just been talking about. That, for instance, the idea that inspiration, creativity, doesn't come
from accumulation of knowledge, because obviously a child, a child has not yet accumulated knowledge.
And yet the great ones are on record saying that a child has a capacity to create an adult
credits, the inner child for this capacity to create as an adult. You see, that's kind of weird
if we take the point of view that everything is computation, everything is accumulation of knowledge
that just bigger and bigger data sets, finer and finer neural networks, and then we will be able to
replicate human consciousness. If we take that point of view, then what I just said kind of
doesn't fit, because obviously a child has not been fed any training data, as far as we know.
Yet they're perfectly capable of distinguishing between cats and dogs, for instance, and stuff
like that. But much more than that, they're also capable of that wide-eyed perspective.
So can it really be captured, that perspective, that sense of awe, can it really be captured
by computation alone? I don't know the answer, so I'm not sort of trying to
present a particular point of view. I'm just trying to question
any theory that starts out by saying life is this, or consciousness is this.
Because when you look more closely, you recognize that there are some other things
at play which do not quite fit the narrative. And it's hard to know where they come from.
It's also possible that the evolutionary process as created is the very, it is computation.
And the child is actually not a blank slate, but the result of one of the most incredible,
several billion-year-old computations that had explored all kinds of aspects of life on earth,
of war, and love, and terror, and ambition, and violence, and invention, all of that from
the bacteria today. So that young child is not a blank slate. They actually hold within them
the knowledge of several billions of years. Right. The question is whether, as a child,
you carry that in the form of the kind of computational algorithms that we are aware
today. You see, what strikes me as unlikely is that, how should I put it? How interesting that,
you are a computer scientist and there are other people, I have studied computer science,
so I know a little bit. And so it's tempting to say, oh, the whole world is computer science,
or is based, can be explained by computer science. Why? Because it makes me feel good,
because I have mastered it, I have learned it. My ego is very happy, and people come to me,
and they look up to me, and they revere me, kind of like priests in old days, when the religion
was paramount, when you would tend to explain things in theological religious terms. Today,
science has progressed. There are fewer people who kind of buy into official religion. So
we have this knowledge, I suppose, to explain, and to know, and to dissect, and to analyze,
and to conceptualize, which is a wonderful quality that we have, and we should definitely pursue
that. But I find it a little bit unlikely that the universe is just exactly what I have learned,
and not something that I don't know, you see. Well, there's a lot of interesting
aspects of the current large language models that one perspective of it, I think, speaks to the
love and math that you talk to, which is they're trained on human data from the internet.
So at its best, a large language model, like GPT-4, captures the magic of the human condition
on its full display, its full complexity. And since mimicking, it's trying to compress all the
weirdness of humans, of all the debates and discussions, the perspectives, all the different
ways that people approach solving different problems, all of that compressed. So we live,
we're each individual ants. We only have like, we have a family, we interact with a few little
ants. And here comes AI that's able to summarize like a TLDR report of humanity.
And that's the beauty of it. So I embrace it. I'm very impressed by it.
I wonder if it can be very impressive, meaning way more impressive in being able to
fake or simulate or emulate a human. Fake. I'm glad you mentioned that,
because that seems to be the mantra. It's just fake it till you make it, isn't it?
Isn't that what we all do though? No, well, yes, we do that, but we also do other things.
We can be truly in love. We can be truly inspired when it is not fake. I do believe,
call me romantic, okay, but I do believe. And this is a very good, I'm glad you're putting it in
these terms because I've had conversations like that, that, yeah, fake it till you make it, but
that's what humans do. Yes, we do that, but not all the time. And that is debatable because also
I speak from my own experience. And that's where the first person perspective comes in.
The subjective view. I cannot prove to you, for instance, or anyone else that there are certain
moments in my life where I am genuine. I am pure, so to speak, when it's not faking it.
But I do have a tremendous certainty of it. And that's a subjective certainty. Now,
I am, as a scientist, I'm also trained to give more credibility to objective arguments that
and other things that can be reproduced, things that I can demonstrate, that I can show. But as I
get older, as I get more mature, hopefully, you know, I'm starting to question why I am not
giving as much credibility to my subjective understanding of the world, the kind of the
first person perspective. When actually modern science has already sold on that, you know,
quantum mechanics has shown unambiguously that the observer is always involved in the observation.
Likewise, Gödel's incompleteness theorems, to me, show how essential
is the observer of the mathematical theory. For one thing, that's the one who chooses the axioms.
And we can talk about this in more detail. Likewise, Einstein's relativity, where
time is relative to the observer, for instance.
That's brilliant. You're just describing all of these different scales, the observer,
what the observer is. So science of 19th century had, from modern perspective, and I don't want
to offend anybody, had the delusion that somehow you could analyze the world being completely
detached from it. We now know after the landmark achievements of the first half of the 20th century
that this is nonsense. That is simply not true. And this has been experimentally proved time and
time again. So to me, I'm thinking maybe it's a hint that I should take my first person perspective
seriously as well and not just rely on kind of objective phenomena, things that can be
proved in a traditional sort of objective way by setting up an experiment that can be
repeated many times. Maybe I fall in love in the party, you know, the deepest love of my life,
perhaps hasn't happened yet, perhaps I will fall in love, but it's a unique event. You
can't reproduce it necessarily, you see. So in that sense, you see how these things are closely
connected. I think that if we are declaring from the outset that all there is to life is,
you know, computation in the form of neural networks or something like this,
however sophisticated they might be, I think we are from the outset denying to ourselves
the possibility that, yes, there is a side of me which is not faking it. Yes, there is a side of
me which cannot be captured by logic and reason. And you know what another great scientist said,
bless Pascal? He said, the heart has its reasons of which the reason knows nothing.
And then he also said, the last step of reason is to grasp that there are infinitely many
things beyond reason. How interesting, this was not a theologian, this was not a priest,
this was not a spiritual guru. It was a hardcore scientist who actually developed,
I think, one of the very first calculators. How interesting that this guy also was able to
impart on us that wisdom. Now, you can always say that's not the case.
But why should we, from the outset, exclude this possibility that there is something to what
he was saying? That is my question. I'm not taking sides. What I'm trying to do is to shake a
little bit the debate because most mathematicians that I know and computer scientists even more so,
they're kind of already sold on this. We are just, you know, reminds me of this famous Lord
Kelvin's quote from the end of 19th century. There's some debate whether he actually said that, but
never let a good story, you know, stand in the way of truth. He said, physics is basically
finished. All that remains is more, more precise measurement. So I find a lot of my colleagues
are happy to say, everything's finished. We already got, we got it. We got it. Maybe a little tweaks
in our language models, you know. So now here's my question. I'm kind of playing devil's advocate
a little bit because I don't see the other side of what represented that much. And I'm saying,
okay, could it be also that if you believe in that, that that becomes your reality?
That you can kind of put yourself in a box where everything is computation, and then you start
seeing things as being such. It's confirmation bias, if you will, you know. This also reminds me,
you know, that I think a good analogy is it's a friend of mine, Philippe Caution told me that in
France there is this literary movement, which is called Olipo, O-U-L-I-P-O. And it's a bunch of
writers and mathematicians who create works of literature where in which they basically impose
certain constraints. A good example of this is a novel, which is called The Void or Disappearance
by a writer named Georges Perec, which is a 300 page novel in French,
which never uses the letter E, which is the most widely used letter of the French language.
So in other words, he set these parameters for himself. I'm going to write a book where I don't
use this letter, which is a great experiment and I applaud it. But that's one thing to do
that and to kind of show his gamesmanship, if you will, and his ability as a writer.
But it's another thing if at the end of writing this book, when you finish the book, he would say
letter E actually doesn't exist and try to convince us that in fact French language does not have
that letter simply because he was able to go so far without using it, you see. So self-imposed
limitation, that's how I see it. And I wonder why we should do that. Do we really feel the urge
to say the world is like that? The world can be explained this way or that way. And I'm saying
it, it's a personal question for me because I am addicted to knowledge myself. Hi, my name is Edward.
And I'm a knowledge addict. I'm being serious, I'm not being facetious. Up until very recently,
maybe a couple of years ago, I simply did not feel comfortable if I could not say the given answer,
explanation. It's like, oh, there has to be some explanation. And I try to frantically search for
it. Just for somebody like me and I heard, you know, a left brainiac and, you know,
that's kind of typical for scientists, for mathematicians. It is incredibly hard.
Just to allow the possibility that it's a mystery and not to feel the urge
to get the answer. It is incredibly hard. What's possible? And it is liberating.
It's a recovering addict to knowledge. Let me say what you gain from it. For instance,
I understand the value of paradoxes. I appreciate paradoxes more. And, you know,
to use another philosopher, Soren Kierkegaard, the Danish philosopher, said,
I think her without paradox is like a lover without passion.
A paltry mediocrity.
Oh, that's a good line.
All right. So, and, you know, Niels Bohr, Niels Bohr said in Simmerwain, the great Danish,
also, something about Danes. I think it all started with Hamlet, you know.
He said the opposite of a simple truth is a falsity. But the opposite of a great truth
is another great truth. In other words, things are not black and white, you know, they're not,
and I would even venture to say the most interesting things in life are like that.
The ones which are ambiguous. Is an electron a particle or a wave?
It depends how you set up an experiment. It will reveal itself as this or that,
depending on how you set up an experiment. This bottle, if you project it down onto the table,
you will see more or less a square. If you project it onto a wall, you will see a different shape.
A naive question would be, is it this or that? Because we understand that it's neither.
But both projections reveal something. They reveal different sides of it. A paradox is like that.
It's only paradoxical if we are confined in a particular vision, if we are wedded to a particular
point of view. It's a harbinger, if you will, of a possibility of seeing things as they are,
as more sophisticated than we thought before. You see.
That's such a difficult idea for science to grapple with, that, you know, I don't know how
there's so many ways to describe this, but you could say maybe that the subjective experience of
the world from an observer is actually fundamental. But we know that. Our best physical theories tell
that unambiguously. In quantum mechanics, actually, you know, Heisenberg, I think,
captured it the best when he said, what we observe is not reality itself,
but reality subjected to our method of questioning. When I talk about electrons,
for instance, so that there is a very specific way in which you, in which this is realized,
there is a so-called double slit experiment. For those who don't know, you have a screen
and you have an emitter from which you kind of shoot electrons, and in between you put another
screen which has two vertical slits parallel to each other. If we were shooting, you know, tennis
balls, each ball would go through one slit or another and then hit the screen behind this or
that slit, so you would have, let's say, they're colored, they're painted. So there would be sort
of bumps or spots of paint behind this or that. But that's not what happens when we
shoot electrons. We see an interference pattern, as if we were actually sending a wave, so that
each electron, it seems like each electron goes through both slits at once and then has the audacity
to interfere with itself, where at some points, you know, two crests would amplify and at some
points, a crest in the trough would cancel each other. Yet, so that suggests, okay, so the electron
is a wave, not so fast, because if you put a detector behind one of the slits and you say,
I'm going to capture you, I'm going to find out which slit you went through, the pattern will
change and it will look like the particles. So that's a very concrete realization of the idea
that depending on how we set up an experiment, we will see different results. And the problem,
the problem is that our psyche, I feel, kind of is lagging behind in part because maybe our
scientists are not doing such a great job. So I take responsibility for this, that why haven't I
explained this properly, you know, I tried, you know, in a bunch of talks and so on. So now I'm
talking about this again. Our psyche kind of is lagging behind. We're still, even though our
science has progressed so much from the certainty and the determinism and all of that of the 19th
century, our psyche is somehow still attached to those ideas, the ideas of causality or this
naive determinism that the world has a bunch of billiard balls hitting each other, driven by some
blind forces, you know, that's not at all like it is. And we've known this for over, for, well,
for about 100 years at least, you know. And you call this self-imposed limitation.
It is a self-imposed limitation when we pretend that, for instance, that this naive ideas of 19th
century physics are still valid and then start applying them to our lives and then also derive
conclusions from it. And for instance, people say, there is no free will. Why? Oh, because the world
is just a bunch of billiard balls. Where is the free will? But excuse me, didn't you get the memo
that this has been debunked thoroughly by the so-called quantum mechanics, which is our best
scientific theory? This is not some kind of bullshit or some kind of concoction of a madman.
This is our scientific theory, which has been confirmed by experiment. So we should pay attention
to that. But of course, it's not just self-imposed limitation. Unfortunately, in this case, there
is a big issue of education. So a lot of people are not aware of it through no fault of their own,
because they were never properly taught that, because our system is broken, education system
is broken, especially math. So where do we get information? You get information from
our scientists who actually write popular books and so on, which is a great thing that they do.
But a lot of scientists somehow, when it comes to explaining the laws of physics,
they're doing a fantastic job talking about this phenomenon, for instance,
double slit experiments and things like that. But then interviewed by Science Magazine about
free will and so on, they revert back to 19th century physics, as if those developments
actually never happened. So to me, this is single most important issue in our popular science.
The idea that somehow there is this world out there, but it has nothing to do with me.
So I can revel in the intricacies of these particles and their interactions,
but completely ignore what implications this has for my own relationship to physical reality,
to my own life, because it's kind of scary, I guess.
But also, what are the tools with which we can talk about the observer,
the subjective view in reality? What are the tools with which we could talk about
rigorously talk about free will and consciousness? What are the tools of mathematics that allow that?
I don't think we have those tools.
Because we haven't been taught properly. So actually, tools are there.
For instance, I think, well, here we have to say, my conviction is that everybody knows.
In the heart of hearts, everybody knows that there is that. There is something
ineffable. There is something mysterious. And in fact, you know, somehow immediately,
I feel that, you know, the impulse to quote somebody on this, because as if my own opinion doesn't go.
There's a long dead expert that has said that, you know, so like, how, see, look at me.
I am supposedly like this smart, intelligent person. I am afraid to say it and own it myself.
I have to find confirmation. I have to find an authority who agrees with me. And in fact,
it's not so difficult to find because Albert Einstein literally said the most important thing
in life is the mysterious. Okay, he actually said that there are some quotes which are
attributed to him, which he never said, but this he did. I investigated. Okay.
But more importantly, you know, how do you feel about it? I think that everybody knows.
But in other words, he also said Einstein, imagination is more important than knowledge.
Okay. And he explained, for knowledge is always limited. Whereas imagination embraces
the entire world, giving birth to evolution. It is strictly speaking, a real factor in scientific
research, he says. And he says, I am enough of an artist to follow my intuition and imagination.
That's Albert Einstein again. So, and I feel the same way, to be honest,
if I think about my own mathematical research, it's never linear. It's never like, give me more
data, give me more data, give me more data, boom, the glass is full. And then I come up with a
discovery. No, it's always, always, is always felt as a jump, as a leap. And I have actually been
studying various examples in history of mathematics of some fundamental discoveries,
like discovery complex numbers, like square root of negative one. I wonder if a large language
model could actually ever come up with the idea that square root of negative one
is something that is essential or meaningful. Because if all the information that you get,
that all the, all the knowledge that had been accumulated up to that point
tells you that you cannot have a square root of a negative number. Why? Because if you had
such a square root, we know that if then we would have to, if you square it, you get a negative
number. But we know that if you square any real number, positive or negative, you will always
get a positive number. So checkmate, you know, it's over square root of negative one doesn't exist.
Yet we know that these numbers make sense. They're called complex numbers. And in fact,
quantum mechanics is based on complex numbers. They are essential and indispensable for quantum
mechanics. Could one discover that? So to me, that sounds like a discontinuity in the process of
discovery. It's a jump. It's a departure. It is like a child who is experimenting. It's like a child
who says, I'm not afraid to be an idiot. Everybody says the adults are saying square root of negative
number doesn't exist. But guess what? I'm going to accept it. And I'm going to play with it.
And I'm going to see what happens. This is literally how they were discovered. There was an
Italian mathematician, astronomer, astrologer. He was, he made money apparently by compiling
astrological sort of readings for for the elite, you know, of his ear. This is 16th century as one
does a gambler. All around interesting guy. I'm sure we would have an interesting conversation
with him, Gerolamo Cardano. He's he also invented the what's called cardan shaft. So which is an
essential component of a car. Cardano Vival, we say in Russian. So, so he wrote a book which is
called ours Magna, which is like a great art of algebra. And he was writing solutions for the
cubic and quartic equations. This is something that is familiar because
it's cool. We study solutions of quadratic equations, equations of degree two. So you have
x, a x squared plus b x plus c equals zero. And there is a formula which solves it using radicals
using square roots. And Cardano was trying to find a similar formula for the cubic and quartic
equations for which which would start with x cube or x to the power of four, as opposed to x squared.
And in the process of solving these equations, he came up with square root of a negative number,
specifically square root of minus 17. And he wrote that I have to forgo some mental tortures
to deal with it. But I am going to accept it and see what happens. And in fact, at the end of the
calculation, this this this weird numbers got canceled, they kind of canceled out in the formula
appeared square root of negative 17 and its negation. So they kind of conveniently gave the
right answer, which is not involved those numbers. So he was like, okay, what does it mean mental
tortures? So you see from the point of view of the of the thinking mind, it is something almost
unbearable. It's almost I feel that a large language model, a computer running large language
model trying to do that would just explode. And yet a human mathematician was able to find the
courage and inspiration to say, you know what? What's his role? Why? Why are we so adamant that
these things don't exist? That's just our past knowledge is based on what our past knowledge
is and knowledge is limited. What if we make the next step? Today, for us mathematicians complex
numbers with that we call them are not at all mysterious. The idea is simply that you plot
real numbers. That is to say all the whole numbers like zero one and so on, two and so right,
all fractions like one half or three halves or four over three. But then also numbers like
square root of two or pi, we plot them as points on the real line. So we draw this is a this is one
of the kind of perennial concepts even in our very poor math curriculum at school. But now imagine
that instead of one line, you have one axis, you have a second axis. And so your numbers now have
two coordinates, x and y, and you associate to this point with coordinates x and y, the number x,
which is real number plus y times square root of negative one. This is a graphical geometrical
representation of complex numbers, which is not mysterious at all. Now it took another two or
three hundred years for mathematicians to figure that out. But initially it looked like a completely
crazy idea, you know. So all it is all a complex number is just an expansion.
Real number, two real numbers. The real part and the imaginary part.
It's just an expansion of your view of the mathematical world.
The fact that you can actually you can add them up by adding together the real parts and
imaginary parts. That's easy. But there is also a formula for the product, for the multiplication,
which uses the fact that square root of minus one squared is minus one.
And the amazing thing is that that that product that multiplication satisfies the same rules,
the same properties that are usual operation of multiplication for real numbers. For instance,
there is an inverse for every nonzero number that you can find like number five has an inverse one
over five. But one plus I also has an inverse, for instance, you know.
That was always there in the mathematical universe. But we humans didn't know it.
And here comes along this guy who engages in the mental torture, who takes a leap off the cliff
of comfort of like mathematical comfort. Established knowledge.
Established knowledge. Right. And now, obviously, for each sort of fruitful leap like that,
there probably were thousands of like things which went nowhere. I'm not saying that every
leap, you know, it's like it's a it's an open shooting game. Because, for example,
you can try to do the same with three dimensional space. So you have coordinates x, y and z.
And you can say, oh, if there's one dimensional, we have a bona fide numerical system called real
numbers. If it's two dimensional, which is like, you know, geometrically, it's just like the
the stable top extended to infinity in all directions. These are complex numbers. And we
can define addition and multiplication. And they will satisfy the same properties as real numbers
that we're used to. What about three dimensional space? Is it possible to also define some
operation of addition and multiplication on it so that these operations would satisfy
the properties that we're used to? And the answer is no, you can define addition, but you can't
define multiplication for which there would be an inverse, for instance. So there is something
special about the the plane, the two dimensional case. And by the way, next question would be
what about four dimensional in four dimensional space, you again, you can and you get what's
called quaternions discovered by an Irish mathematician Hamilton in the 19th century.
And then in in the eight dimensional, there is something similar called octonians. And that's
about it. So how interesting these structures exist in dimension one, two, four, and eight,
which are all powers of two. Two squared is four, two to the third power is eight.
That's one of the bigger mysteries in mathematics. Why it is so? So that's a hint. There's a hint of
what's missing in our high school curriculum, you know, the kind of fascinating mysteries.
Yes, the appreciation of the mysterious. So in other words, yes, we resolved this one mystery
that we understood that square root of negative one is real, is meaningful. We build a theory
to service those now to describe those numbers. Did we find the theory of everything? No, because
we then invited other mysteries, because we we push the front, we pull the veil, so to speak,
we push the frontier, and then new things come get illuminated, which we couldn't see before.
That's how I see the process of discovery in mathematics is an endless, limitless pursuit.
Can you comment on what you think this human capability of imagination that Einstein spoke
about of the artists following their intuition in this big Alice in Wonderland world of
of imagination? What is it? You visit there sometimes. What does it feel like?
Yeah, what does it feel like? What is it? What is that like playing? But I think all of us are
engaged in that kind of play, no matter when we do what we love. I think it always feels the same.
It's not real, right? You're so that you're describing a feeling, but that place you go to
in the imagination, it's bigger than the real world. So there is a big conundrum as to whether
mathematics is invented or discovered. And mathematicians are divided on this. Nobody knows.
Where do you bet your money on financially? Investment advice. So let me tell you something.
My views have evolved. When I wrote Love and Math, when I wrote my book,
I was squarely on the side of mathematics is discovered. What does it mean? Usually mathematicians
or others who have this idea, what I believe, are called a Platonists in honor of the great
philosopher Plato, who talked about these absolute perfect forums. So for me, about 10 years ago,
the world of mathematics was this world of pure forms, this beautiful, pure forms,
which existed outside of space and time. But I was able to connect to it through my mind.
And as it were, kind of dive into it and bring treasures back into this world, into this space
and time, that's how I viewed the process of mathematical discovery. How nice, how neat, very
neat picture. Also makes you feel connected to something divine. It allows you the sense of
escape from the cruelty and injustice of this world, which I now recognize.
And the divine world of forms is stable, reliable.
Something stable. In that world, everything is clear cut. It's either true or false.
Yeah, it's nice. It's very nice.
The biggest illusion of all.
Allegedly.
I think now, I think now, I understand why I liked it because I think that I was very
dissatisfied with the, with the, what we call the real world, the world around me,
the cruelty, the injustice of it. And I went through certain experiences as a kid,
which made me love mathematics even more as this place where I could be safe.
And in control.
Made you see the human world as lesser than the mathematical world.
Yes.
As more limited than the mathematical world.
Yes. Yes. And I think that,
I think that they're still missing the mark in some sense because, in fact,
what I now think it's not, it's not, it's a paradoxical question,
the question whether mathematics is invented to discover it,
whether there is this world of pure forms and so on.
Is, is, is another paradoxical question, which doesn't have a simple answer,
like whether electron is a particle or a wave.
From one point of view, yes, it's true.
And just the fact that so many mathematicians today actually subscribe to this idea
gives it a certain credibility because that's what we feel.
We do feel that we dive into, dive into that
mindscape, so to speak.
But the very structured mindscape where I wrote in Love and Math that,
you know, the enchanted gardens of Platonic reality, where all this fruit grows.
And then we might mention, it gives you this sort of romantic sense of an explorer.
And someone may be stuck in a, you know, some provincial town in Russia, for instance,
but have the sense of a Magellan, you know, of traveling around the world.
It's just not in the world that we usually think of.
So it's, it's one point of view.
But the other point of view is that, yes, it is a human process.
Of course it is.
I mean, it is, you cannot deny that.
It's human beings who have so far discovered new mathematics.
And I do not deny the possibility that a computer programs will be able to discover new mathematics.
But so far it's been humans.
So it, whatever it is, whether it's discovered or invented, it is a human activity.
The possibility that paradoxes are actually fundamental to reality and really,
really internalizing that, that we exist in the world of not forms, but of paradoxes.
Bingo.
And so it's like what I said, but if you think it's weird, and I agree with you,
as a recovering addict to knowledge, you know, but I am liking it more and more
because there's so much freedom in it.
And like, like Nils Bohr said, you know, like quoted that earlier,
the opposite of a great truth is another great truth.
He's pointing out to this fact that, you know, and he also said that some,
some things in quantum physics are so complicated, the only way you can speak of them is in poetry.
So in other words, what is it about poetry?
What is it about art?
Why are we so drawn to that?
Why are we so captivated by those forms of, they are not intellectual necessarily.
They are not, when you look at a painting that you like, when you listen to music that you love,
you get lost in it, you get absorbed in it, it can make you cry, it can make you laugh,
it can make you remember something, it can make you feel more confident,
it can make you feel sad or happy and so on.
What is this all about?
Is it really just some play between some kind of like,
cellophane play or some neurons hitting on each other?
Is it really that only?
Maybe.
It could be, it could be both.
I'm just worried about kids these days that might live in a world of paradoxes,
you know, if there's no God, everything is possible.
I mean, I just, they'll have a little too much fun and we have to put a constraint to the fun.
Have you looked at the world lately?
I haven't checked in in a while.
You think it's perfect, the way it is now, the world without paradoxes,
the world in which we believe that every question can be answered
as yes or no, that it is this or that, and if you disagree with me, you are my enemy.
Wouldn't that be interesting if this 21st century is a transition
into seeing the world as a world of paradoxes?
I'm telling you, you know, people predicted that, you know, the age of Aquarius,
you know, that the axis of the of the earth is rotating
relative to the plane in which the earth goes around the sun.
And the period of this revolution is around 2000 years.
So there is a traditional way of measuring that by this
eras, you know, the ages.
So the previous one was called the age of Pisces
because of the constellation of Pisces that it points to, so to speak, you know.
And now it's, you know, as in famous musical hair, they said the age of Aquarius is up on us.
So the different people dated differently, but somewhere around the time where we are
finding ourselves.
How interesting, right, is all the strife and all the
difficulties the world is experiencing.
This might actually be the transition to something more harmonious.
Wouldn't it be nice?
It's also interesting that people from long ago are able to predict certain things.
And it's almost like from long ago, and you've talked about this with Pythagoras,
that it seems that they had a deep sense of truth.
That sort of permeates all of this even now.
So it's not just a linear trajectory of an expanding knowledge.
There's a deep truth that permeates the whole thing.
Yes.
So that's how I see it.
Actually, I gave a talk about Pythagoras and Pythagoreans just a few weeks ago at the
Commonwealth Club of California in San Francisco.
And because of that, I did a kind of a deep dive into the subject.
And I learned that I actually totally misunderstood Pythagoras and Pythagoreans,
that they were much deeper than I thought.
Because most of us remember Pythagoras from the Pythagoras theorem about the right triangles.
We also know that Pythagoreans were instrumental in introducing the tuning system for the musical
scale, the famous perfect fifth, three halves of the G for the soul, compared to the frequency of
door, C. But actually, they were much more interesting.
So for them, numbers were not just clerical devices, that kind of thing that you would
use in accounting only.
They were imbued with the divine.
And I cannot say that I think we lost it, at least I have lost it.
I look at numbers and I don't really see that.
The divine.
That they clearly did.
And so why else, how else would you explain?
In other words, divine is, of course, is a term which is a bit loaded.
So it's hard to escape that.
Let's just say something that more from the world of imagination and intuition than from
the world of knowledge.
Let's just put it this way.
They were able to divine, okay, that's like that, to intuit that
the planets were not revolving and the sun and the planets were not revolving around the earth.
They were the first ones, at least in the Western culture, as far as I know.
And in fact, Copernicus gave credit to Pythagoreans as being his predecessors.
They did not quite have the Copernicus model with the sun in the middle.
They had what they call the central fire in the middle and all the planets and the sun
were revolving around the central fire or earth.
They called it earth.
So, but still, what a departure from the dogma, from the knowledge of the era that the earth
was at the center.
So how could they come up with this idea?
The reason was, in my opinion, that for them, the most movement of celestial bodies was like
music. In fact, we call it musical universalis or music of the spheres.
For them, the universe was this infinite symphony in which every being, humans, animals,
as well as the earth and other celestial bodies were moving in harmony,
like different notes of different instruments in the symphony.
And so they applied the same reasoning to the cosmological model as they applied to
their model of music.
And from that perspective, they could see things deeper than their contemporaries.
So, in other words, they saw mathematics as a tool, but that tool was not limited to itself.
They always knew that there is more, and they knew also that every pattern that you detect
is finite, but the world is infinite.
They actually accepted infinity.
They believed that infinity is real.
And if you discern a pattern, great.
You can play with it, and you can use that.
It gives you a certain lens through which to see the world in a particular way,
which could be beneficial for you to learn more and so on.
But they never had the illusion that that was the final word,
that they always knew that it's not the whole thing.
So there is more.
There are more sophisticated patterns that could be discovered using mathematics or otherwise.
And I think that what happened was we kind of lost this other side of their teachings.
We took their numbers and they were like,
idea that you could use mathematics to discern patterns and to find regularities
and to explain things about the world.
We took that and we ran with it.
And we kind of dropped the other idea that, in fact, there is another side to it,
which is kind of, to us now, we say, oh, that's mystical.
But what does it mean, mystical, if it is something that helps you to make great discoveries?
And the interesting thing is that the people who are in touch with the mystical among us,
are often seen as mad.
And many of them are, most of them are.
Well, but not all of them.
Not all of them.
We mentioned Niels Bohr and Newton and Albert Einstein.
So that's where the conundrum is.
How do you find the balance between the two?
So the point I'm trying to make, and this is what I feel,
you know, if you ask me what I find most important today,
like what makes me excited and enthusiastic and passionate is this idea of balance.
So, you know, Nietzsche had this book, wrote this book in the 19th century called
the birth of tragedy.
And he presented this theory, which I think is kind of very useful.
Of the two sides of a human, one that comes from God Apollo.
And that's our left brain, so to speak, proverbial left brain.
So it's everything has to do with, that has to do with logic and reason
and analyzing, dissecting, conceptualizing.
And the other side, which comes from God Dionysus Dionysus.
And that's responsible for intuition, imagination, love.
Dionysus was also God of wine.
So it's also that side of a human that makes us sing and engage in, you know,
revelry and drink wine and spend time with friends and love and enjoy it, you know.
So Nietzsche advocated this point of view that those were two complementary sides
of every human and as well as society.
And the purpose of human life is to find balance between them.
So math is both discovered and invented.
We should be okay with having both ideas in our head and living in the balance.
But more importantly, for me, Apollo is like math and Dionysus is like love.
So Dionysus and Apollo in modern version is love and math.
I return to that question we had about GPT and the language models.
And I think about this quite a lot, which is when the model and we know what is trained on,
we know the parameters, we know all the different hacks that are involved in the
training process and the fine tuning process.
And the final results, whether it's GPT five, six or seven, will result in hundreds of millions
of people falling deeply in love with that language model and to be able to have conversations
that are very much like the conversations we have with somebody we're deeply in love with.
And not only that, the model will say that is deeply in love with us.
And who are we to say it is not?
I think it's the same imperative that you described in the scientific mind
that wants to throw away the subjective.
That same imperative wants to throw away the feelings that AI might have.
And I'm very careful to not ignore when an AI system says it's lonely,
it's afraid, it doesn't want to die, it misses you, it loves you.
And with you, I would also say that you could, for instance, say that
the origin of that is the romantic novels that were fed to it, for instance.
However, then you can retort.
But what if my, what I consider my subjective, unique feelings are also
novels that were fed.
The reverberations of the novels I have read because I have learned or movies I have seen.
Because that's the purpose of movies or kind of to teach us how to express ourselves,
how to feel, maybe even one could argue that some people have argued that.
I agree that this is, there is no obvious answer to this, but see, that's exactly my point.
That is an example of something which is paradoxical for which there is no answer.
And that's where the subjective has an important role.
For someone, that type of interaction would be helpful, would be consoling, would feel,
would make them happy or sad or whatever, would kind of strike the nerve.
For some, it won't.
And I agree with you that in principle, there is no one to judge this.
So this is where subjective is paramount.
But remember, a lot of this has been anticipated by artists.
The great movie, Her, there you have this guy who is this lonely.
He kind of writes letters or something.
The romantic letters, yeah.
Kind of romantic letters for other people, but he doesn't have a partner.
He's lonely.
And then he gets this sort of enhanced version of Siri with the voice
of Scarlett Johansson, which is a very sexy voice, obviously she's a great actress.
So, and then at first it looks like a fantastic arrangement.
He confides in her, she tells him things, she makes him happy and so on until he finds out
that she has a relationship, quote unquote, if you can call it that, with 10,000 other people.
Not two others, not three others.
Yeah, like 10,000.
Because it has a computing capability.
So yes, definitely.
Oh, it certainly makes sense.
It's a good explanation.
And the guy is heartbroken.
But see, so here's my analysis of this, okay?
It's like a couch therapist, okay?
The guy did not have the courage to go out in the real world and to meet a woman and to
get a girlfriend and so on.
It's true, no fault of his own, perhaps, because you may have had some experiences
which made him withdrawn and closed and so on.
And a lot of us are like this.
I had periods like that myself, definitely can sympathize and relate.
However, part of the joy of having this Siri-like relationship for him, one could say,
was the absence of that fear that she would abandon him, which prevented him from
initiating a relationship with a human being.
And yet it turns out that he could be betrayed, quote unquote,
that she could be unfaithful to him, quote unquote, anyway.
So then that means that it did not resolve the underlying fear having that relationship.
So in other words, that human element of the relationship still found its way
into the seemingly sterilized, protected partnership.
So the human being rears its head anyway.
And I think the lesson there is that the system in the movie her actually gave him a lesson
that even AI could betray you, even AI can leave you, even AI can be unfaithful to you.
And I would argue that the next AI he meets will be one he actually falls in deep love with,
because he knows the possibility of betrayal is there, the possibility of death is there,
the possibility of infidelity is there, because we need that possibility to truly feel good.
Or he would turn off his Siri program and get out of his house, go to a local bar
and strike a conversation with a human being.
Although you might say by then some of those might be androids.
And we don't even have a good test to know the difference between one or the other.
And that was predicted by another great movie, right?
Blade Runner.
How interesting that artists could see that so long ago, you know.
Of course Blade Runner was based on a novel by Philip K. Dick,
The Androids' Dream of Electric Sheep.
That guy was a genius, you know.
It's somehow that artists have their eyes open to bigger reality.
How is it that they anticipate?
Is it also a large language model that they're using for that?
An even larger one.
Or even larger.
I hesitate to dismiss the magic in large language models.
A lot of the work I've done is in robotics.
And the robotics community generally doesn't notice the magic of feeling.
I've been working a lot with quadrupeds recently, legged robots with four legs.
And the feelings I feel when I see, you know, I'm programming the thing,
but when the thing is excited to see me or shows with this physical movement that it's excited to
see me, I cannot dismiss the feeling I feel as not somehow fundamental to what it means
to program robots.
And I don't want to dismiss that.
Please don't.
The robotics community often does engender robots.
They really try to work hard to not anthropomorphize the robots,
which is good for technical development of how to do control, how to do perception.
But when the final thing is alive and moving, and it does whatever,
like I've been doing a lot of butt wiggling.
It can wiggle his butt.
It can turn around and look up excited.
That's not just, I know how it's programmed, but the feeling I feel, that's something.
That's, I don't know what that is.
I agree.
I agree with you.
I hear you when you speak about it.
You speak with passion.
And that's, to me, that is proof that it is magical, you see.
So don't, I would say, don't dismiss that.
Don't discard that.
On the contrary, I think magic is everywhere, you know.
So I used to be, okay, kind of confession, okay.
Yeah, you already confessed to quite a few addictions.
Yeah, I'm kind of worried.
Recovering for many.
But, you know, I, in old days, I was more on the side of everything is computational,
or everything can be explained by science and whatever, you know.
I would dismiss and disregard, you know, the intuitive or imaginative things.
So then I had a flip, that suddenly I started feeling it and started seeing it and so on.
So then the pendulums had swung in the opposite direction.
Then I was arguing that, you know, somehow that was the real,
that imagination was intuitive, imaginative was real,
and discounting what you just described.
And I would argue with people saying, no, no, this, you know, this is not real.
This is all, you know, imitation game and so on.
But you see that what's new now, the new Edward, okay, is the 2.0, 3.0,
is the one who is seeking balance, who is not, who is,
because suddenly become aware that no matter which one side,
that lopsided point of view you take, you're limiting yourself.
So whereas even a couple of years ago, you know, if you just told me what you just described,
I would be like, you know, being polite, I would just, I wouldn't contradict you,
since you're the host anyway, right?
It's not a law.
So, but I would be like, uh-huh, uh-huh, but I wouldn't say anything.
But suddenly I find this moving.
I find it moving, I honest, I'm not being facetious.
I find it moving and I almost feel like I can see it through your eyes,
because the way you describe it so vividly and you're passionate about it.
And this is what's real.
So ultimately, love is not, is neither in language models,
nor in something mystical.
It's exactly in these moments of passion.
And I would, I would, I would even go as far as saying that in this moment,
when you're describing it, it, there was a connection of sorts,
so that I could feel your passion for it.
And in this moment, something else comes up,
which is far beyond any, any theories that we can come up with.
And that's what we, for now, exactly.
So on the one side, there is this impulse of finding the theory, a theory.
And then there is another impulse to escape from what has already been known.
So one, in other words, like in my basic example is one impulse to say,
everything is real numbers, square root of negative one doesn't exist.
But another impulse is, I'm going to be this naughty child
who is not afraid to be an idiot.
And I will say square root of negative 15 is real.
And both are essential when it's done with conviction,
when it's done with passion, when it's not like, you know,
you know, gratuitous, or when it's not, it doesn't come from self-limiting,
self-limiting, but comes from this sense of this is how I am.
This is how I feel.
It is real.
That's where progress is.
That's where creativity is.
And that's where I would even say a real connection is.
Because the strife to me that I observe today in our society,
and the society level, at the level of humans and so on,
it comes from not seeing the other person actually,
and being caught up in a very specific conceptual bubble, you see.
And the way out of it is not to refine the bubble, but just break out of it.
A good guide out of the bubble is a childlike passion.
We're discovering that and following it.
Goosebumps.
Yeah.
Following the goose bumps.
To the, you know, not the rigor of science, but the magic of goose bumps.
Then try to, and then if you're interested,
try to find the confirmation of those goose bumps in science,
or whatever, you know, you know, you'll find interesting.
And most of the time you'll fail.
And most of the time you fail, which we also love,
because then it sets us up for that moment of bliss when we succeed, right?
Exactly.
Quick pause.
Bath and break.
You mentioned Gato's the completeness theorem.
Can you talk a little bit about it?
What is it as you understand it?
Did it break mathematics?
Maybe another question is, what are the limits of mathematics?
What is mathematics from the perspective of Gato's the completeness theorem?
Well, yes.
How much time do you have?
We talked about time previously, so it's all time.
Time was an illusion, right?
So we agreed.
So Kurt Gödel was a great Austrian mathematician and logician.
He moved to the United States before Second World War,
and worked at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
where he was a colleague of Einstein and other great scientists,
von Neumann, Hermann Weil, and so on.
But one interesting quote that I like in this regard is that Einstein said that,
at some point, he said that the only reason he came to the Institute
was that he would have the privilege of walking back home with Gödel in the evening.
So in other words, Einstein thought that Gödel was the smart one.
So his most important contribution was his two incompleteness theorems,
the first incompleteness theorem and the second incompleteness theorem.
And what is this about?
It's really about inherent limitations of mathematical reasoning,
way of producing mathematical theorems, the way we do it.
So to set the stage, how do we actually do mathematics?
We know that we discussed that physics is based on mathematics,
and you could say chemistry is based on physics, biology is based on chemistry.
Okay, so it comes to mathematics.
What is mathematics based on?
Well, mathematics is based on axioms.
So any field of mathematics can be presented as what is called the formal system.
And at the core of the formal system is a system of axioms or postulates.
These are the statements which are taken for granted.
Given without proof?
Without proof.
An example would be, so one of the very first formal systems was the system
was Euclidean Geometry, developed by Euclid in his famous book Elements about 2200 years ago.
And it's about, well, it's a subject familiar from school because we studied,
but what it's really about is about the geometry of the plane.
And the plane, by plane, I mean just the stable top extended to infinity in all directions,
kind of a perfect plane, a perfectly even table.
And so Euclidean Geometry is about very geometric figures on the plane, specifically lines,
triangles, circles, things like that.
So what's an example of an axiom?
An example of an axiom is that if you have two points, which are not, which are distinct,
two points on the plane, then there is a unique line which passes through them.
Now kind of sounds reasonable, but this is an example of an axiom.
In mathematics, you have to have a seed, so to speak.
You have to start with something.
And you have to choose certain postulates or statements,
which you simply take for granted, which do not require proof.
Usually they are ones which kind of intuitively clear to you, but in any case,
you cannot have any mathematics without choosing those axioms.
And you refer to those as the observer because they're kind of subjective.
The observer comes in the process of choosing the axioms.
Who chooses the axioms?
The turtles that it's all sitting on top of.
As Alan was, you know, like to say who is watching the watchers.
And so in mathematics, what you see mathematicians are so clever.
It's really kind of like a little kind of a game of mirrors that we often like to say,
and I used to say that, that mathematics is objective.
It's really the only objective science.
But that's because we hide this fact that actually is based on axioms.
And the fact that there is no unique choice, that there are many choices.
And so Euclidean geometry is actually a good illustration of this because Euclide had fiber
axioms.
Four of them were kind of obvious, like the one I just mentioned.
And the fifth, which came to be known famously as a fifth postulate,
was that if you have a line and you have a point outside of this line,
there is a unique line passing through that point, which is parallel to the first line,
meaning that doesn't intersect it.
And Euclide himself was uncomfortable about this because he felt that it was kind of,
you know, he takes for granted something that is not obvious.
And for many centuries after that, mathematicians were trying to derive this axiom from other
axioms, which were more obvious in some sense, and they failed.
And it was only almost 2000 years later that mathematicians realized that you can't,
not only you cannot derive, but you can actually replace it with its opposite.
And you will still get a bona fide consistent, not self-contradictory,
which is called non-Euclidean geometry.
Which, of course, sounds very complicated, but it's not.
Think of a sphere, just the surface of a basketball or the surface of the earth,
I know, idealized.
The analogs, so you have points, you have analogs of lines, which are meridians,
every two meridians intersect, unlike parallel lines on a flat space.
There is also so-called hyperbolic plane, where there are infinitely many lines which do not
intersect. So every possibility can be realized, there are different flavors.
This is a good illustration of what a formal system is.
You start with a set of axioms, those statements you take for granted,
and this is where you have a choice.
And by making different choices, you actually create different mathematics.
After that, there are rules of inference, logical rules, such as if A is true and A
applies B, then B is true.
Most of them were actually introduced already by Aristotle, even before Euclid.
And then it runs as follows.
You have the axioms, which are accepted as true statements.
Then you have a way to produce new statements
by using the rules of logical inference from the axioms.
Every statement you obtain, you call a theorem,
and you kind of add it to the collection of true statements.
And then the question is, how far can you go?
How many statements can you prove this way?
Of course, you want the system to be non-trivial in the sense that you don't prove everything.
Because if you prove everything, it would mean that it's self-contradictory,
that you prove a statement A and it's negation.
So that's kind of useless.
It has to be discriminating enough
so that it doesn't prove contradictory statements.
So there is already a question of that mathematicians call consistency.
It has to be consistent in the sense that it is not self-contradictory.
And then the idea that was basically prevalent in the world of mathematics
by the beginning of the 20th century
was that, in principle, all of mathematics could be derived this way.
We just have to find the correct system of axioms.
And then everything you ever need could be produced by this procedure,
which is a really algorithmic procedure,
which actually could be run on a computer.
Now, think about it.
What is special about this process?
In this process, you are just manipulating symbols, basically.
You're going from one statement to another
without really understanding the meaning of it.
So it's an ideal playground for a computer program.
It's a purely syntactic process where there are some rules,
some rigid rules of passing from one statement to the next.
Most mathematicians believe that this way you can produce all true statements.
And if this were true, it would give a lot of credibility
to the thesis that everything in life is computational,
or life is computation.
Because then, at least mathematics is computational,
because then it can be programmed.
And a computer, after sufficient time,
depending on its capacity, would produce every true statement.
So Gödel's first and completeness theorem says that that's not the case.
And it not just says it, but it proves it at the highest level of rigor
that is available in mathematics.
That is to say within another formal system that he was operating in.
So, more precisely, what he proved was that
if you have a sufficiently sophisticated formal system,
that is to say that you can talk about numbers, the whole numbers in it.
That you have whole numbers, one, two, three, four.
You have formalized the operation of addition and multiplication within the system.
If it is consistent, that is to say, if it's not completely useless,
then there will be true statement in it, which cannot be derived
by this linear syntactic process of proving theorems from axioms.
It's really incredible.
So this was a revolution.
1931, a revolution in logic, a revolution in mathematics,
and we're still feeling the tremors of this discovery.
In the similar time, the computer is being born.
The actual engineering of the computational system is being born, which is ironic.
Turing was Alan Turing, who was considered as the father of modern computing.
Right? So he actually did something very similar.
So he had this halting problem that he proved that halting problem cannot be solved algorithmically.
That you cannot, out of all computer programs, roughly speaking,
you cannot have an algorithm of choosing out of all possible computer programs,
which ones are meaningful, which ones will not, which ones will halt.
Very depressing results all across the table.
Or, on the contrary, life-affirming depends on your point of view.
Because everything is full of paradoxes.
So that means, so you're right, it's depressing if we are sold on a certain idea from the outset,
and then suddenly this doesn't pan out.
But okay, so which, I retort.
What if he proved that actually everything can be proved?
So then what?
What is left to do if you're a mathematician?
So that would be depressing to me.
And here there is an opportunity to do something new, to discover something new,
which maybe a computer will not be able to.
Again, with a caveat, according to our current understanding,
maybe some new technology, some new ideas will be brought into the subject.
And the meaning of the word computation, like now we think of computation,
a particular framework, Turing machines or church thesis and stuff like that.
But what if in the future, another genius like Alan Turing will come
and propose something else?
The theory will evolve the way we went from Newton's gravity to Einstein's gravity.
Maybe in the framework of that concept, some other things will become possible.
So it's not, to me, it's kind of like not so much about deciding once and for all
how it is or how it should be, but kind of like accepting it as an open-ended process.
I think that's much more valuable in some sense than deciding things one way or another.
I wonder, I don't know if you think or know much about cellular automata and the idea of emergence.
I often return to game of life and just look at the thing.
Amazing, right?
And wonder the kind of things they can do with such a small, you know, tools.
That from simple rules, a distributed system can create complex behavior.
And it makes you wonder that maybe the thing we'll call computation
is simple at the base layer.
But when you start looking at greater and greater layers of abstraction,
you zoom out with blurry vision.
Maybe after a few drinks, you start to see some something that's much,
much, much more complicated and interesting and beautiful than the original rules
that our scientific intuition says can now possibly produce complexity and beauty.
I don't know.
I don't know if anyone has a good answer, a good model of why stuff emerges,
why complexity emerges from a lot of simple things.
It's a why question, I suppose.
But every why question will eventually have a rigorous answer.
Not necessarily.
We could have an approximate answer, which still eludes something.
Like quantum mechanics.
99% maybe.
We will be able to describe it with 99% certainty or 99% accuracy.
And then maybe in 100 years or next year,
somebody will come up with a different point of view,
which suddenly will change our perspective.
To this point, I want to say also one thing that I find fascinating,
speaking of paradoxes and so on.
Do you remember how everybody was freaking out about this blue dress?
And was it blue or was it black?
I think yellow or white or black and blue.
It almost broke Twitter.
You remember that night.
So there are many examples like that.
Where you can perceive things differently.
And there is no way of saying which is correct and which is not.
For instance, you got this, the bars, the Rubens bars,
you know, where you have, from one perspective, it's a vase.
From another perspective, it's two faces.
Then there is this dark rabbit picture where you can Google it.
If somebody doesn't know, they can Google it and find it.
It's very easy.
Actually, Ludwig Wiedenstein devoted several pages,
dark rabbit, in his book.
And so on.
There are many others.
There are like squares where you can see the square.
You can see it from different perspectives.
This way, that way, and so on.
So when we talk about neural networks,
we're talking about training data and stuff.
So that you have some pictures, for example,
that you feed to your program.
And you try to find the most optimal neural network,
which would be able to decide which one is it,
the dog or a cat or whatever.
But sometimes it doesn't have a definite answer.
So what do you do then?
So actually, it's a question.
I actually don't know.
Has modern AI even come to appreciate this question?
That actually, sometimes you can have a picture
on which you cannot say what it is in it.
From one perspective, it's a rabbit.
From the other perspective, it's a duck.
How are you supposed to train?
If you have a neural network,
which is supposed to distinguish between ducks and rabbits,
how is it going to process this?
You see?
Well, so the trivial trick it does is to say
there's this X probability that it's a duck
and this probability that it's a rabbit.
That's a good approach.
But also, I would say there is no given percentages.
For instance, actually, at some point,
I was really curious about it and I looked.
And for each picture of this nature,
and there are a bunch of them you can easily find online,
my mind immediately interprets it in a particular way.
But because I know that other people
could see it differently,
I would then strain my mind and strain my eyes
and stare at it and try to see it in a different way.
And sometimes I could see it right away
and then I could go back and forth between the two.
And sometimes it took me a while for some pictures.
So in that sense, even if these probabilities exist,
they are subjective.
Some people immediately see it this way,
some people immediately see it that way,
and I think that nobody knows.
Not psychologists, not neuroscientists,
not philosophers, what to make of it.
The best answer, of course, is the scientific mind.
Even though I say, no, don't look for interpretation,
give some place for mysticism or mystery, right?
I say that.
But of course, I want a theory, I want an explanation.
So the best explanation I find is from Niels Bohr's
Complementarity Principle.
So it is like particle and wave,
that there are different ways to look at it.
And when you look at it in a particular way,
another side will be obscured.
Think about it like the other side of the moon.
So we are observing the moon from one side,
and then we don't see the other side.
There is a complementary perspective
where we see the other side,
but not the side we normally see.
But the moon is the same, it's still there.
It's our limitations of being able to grasp the whole.
That's Complementarity.
And we know that from quantum mechanics
that our physical reality is like that,
rather than being certain,
rather than being one way or another.
And we should just, as a small aside,
in terms of neural networks, mention that
at the end of the day, there's humans,
it's built on top of humans.
Or with chat GPT,
that it's using reinforcement learning by human feedback.
We're actually using a set of humans to teach the networks.
And that's the thing that people don't often talk about,
because, or I sometimes think about,
that those humans all have a life story.
Each human that annotated data,
that fed data to the network,
or did the RLHF, they have a life story.
They grew up.
They have biases.
There are some things that they like,
there are some things they don't like,
which kind of appear under the radar screen.
They may not be aware that they are exercising those biases.
That's the point.
What you brought up is a very important issue here.
Not so much issue, but it's not a bug.
It's a feature, in my opinion,
that implicit in the discussion of the question,
is thinking computational and so on,
is the idea that our conscious awareness
covers everything within our psyche.
And we just know that that's not the case.
All of us have observed other people
who have had sort of destructive tendencies.
So obviously, they did things destructive for themselves.
And many of us have observed ourselves to doing that,
as part of human nature.
And there is great research in analytics psychology
and in the past 100 years,
strongly suggesting, if not proving,
the existence of what Carl Jung called the personal unconscious
and also collective unconscious,
the kind of circle of ideas which are under the radar screen,
which lead us to some strong emotions
and inspire us to act in certain ways,
even if we cannot really understand.
So if we accept that, then the proposition
that somehow everything can still be covered by our actions,
which are totally kind of neutral
and totally righteous and totally conscious,
that it becomes really tennis.
Let me ask you some tricky questions
in terms of how big they are,
in terms of how they become difficult
because of how much of a romantic you are.
What do you, is the most beautiful idea in mathematics?
Another one we can ask is,
what is the most beautiful equation in mathematics?
Well, I may have just broken your brain.
Because what your brain is doing is walking down a long memory lane
of beautiful experiences.
Well, you see, in mathematics,
we have this idea that we have an idea of a set,
right? So we have a collection of things.
For instance, the set of tables, the set of chairs,
and so on, or set of microphones,
but could be set of numbers,
could be set of ideas, could be a set of formulas,
mathematical equations.
And then we have the notion of an ordered set,
ordered, like the set in which there is order,
which means that for every two members of the set,
we will say which one is better than the other,
or greater than the other.
For instance, all numbers are ordered.
Five is greater than three, five is less than seven, and so on.
But not all sets are ordered.
So the set of beautiful theorems is not what,
beautiful equations is not ordered.
So in other words, there are many best equations.
And so Richard Feynman chose one,
which I think one of the best,
is that if you take E, the base of natural logarithm,
to the power pi i, so you have pi,
you have E in it, the base of natural logarithm,
you have pi i, which is square root of negative one.
Then the result is negative one.
So that's up there, for sure,
independent of beautiful formulas,
that I think pretty much every mathematician would agree.
I don't know what my favorite one is.
I'm just lingering on that one, Euler's Identity.
What makes it beautiful?
Just a few symbols together.
I mean, part of it is actually just trying to define
what is beautiful about mathematics,
that is laid in there in this particular equation,
that is somehow revealed when the human eye looks at it.
What, why is it beautiful, do you think?
Pi.
There is an element of surprise in it.
How is it possible?
We always think of pi as the ratio
between the circumference of a circle and its diameter.
Here, we are taking some number to the power pi,
not even pi, mind you,
but pi multiplied by square root of negative one.
Surely, this is something completely incomprehensible.
And yet, the result is negative one, you see.
And if you take E to the power two pi i,
you get one, actually one.
So I would guess that that's, but in other words,
the initial reaction is just that of a surprise, I guess.
I guess for anyone who first comes across.
That these three folks, four folks got together.
It reminds me of the idea that Hitler, Stalin, Trotsky,
and Freud were all in Vienna in some early,
at the beginning of the 20th century.
And Biggest Stein was the classmate of Hitler, you know this?
I did not know this, no.
So there, it makes you, you know,
you can imagine a situation where they're all sitting at a bar together
at some point, not knowing it,
but they somehow, it all made sense in space time to be located there.
And that's what this feels like, some kind of intersection.
Intersection, yes.
But I would say that after the initial shock,
you look at the proof of this equation.
And it actually does make sense.
And actually it is nothing but the statement
that the circumference of the circle is.
And in fact, in this case,
it's the circumference of a semicircle is equal to pi.
And that's where it comes from.
In the end, the truth is simple.
In the end, the truth is simple, not necessarily easy, but simple.
So I mentioned to you offline that I, desperately,
in trying to figure out the optimal,
in an order set, questions to ask you,
texted Eric Weinstein asking for what questions he can ask you.
And he said that you are definitively one of the greatest living mathematicians,
so don't screw this up.
But he did give me a few questions.
So he asked to ask you,
what are the most shockingly passionate,
this is in Eric's language,
what are the most shockingly passionate mathematical structures?
And he gave a list of four for him,
but he said he really wanted your list.
Okay, let me say that.
Shockingly passionate mathematical structures.
Shocking.
Is there something you can,
is there something that jumps to mind?
Sure.
I'm here to shock.
So first of all, Eric Weinstein is a very dear friend,
I have to say, and I really, really, really appreciate and love him.
He's just like my brother.
So, you know, it's interesting to have a question posed by him.
It may be if we can linger for a moment,
what do you think is special about Eric Weinstein,
for what you know of his work and his mind?
The way he sort of straddles so many different disciplines,
it's like a Renaissance man.
There are very few people like that at any given moment,
let alone the 21st century,
where information has become so huge
that it's almost physically impossible to be able to keep track of things.
And yet he does, and he has his own unique vision
and unique point of view, and he has integrity,
which is like almost impossible.
Like I can't think of so many people who possess those qualities, almost no one.
And also the ability, in some sense, to embody the balance that you talked about,
of both the rigor of mathematics and the imagination.
Humanity also, I would say.
You know, like we talk about imagination
as a kind of a counterpoint to knowledge or logic.
But just basic humanity, you know, just basic compassion,
just being able to, because every destructive,
I would say like every destructive society,
you know, like be it Germany, you know,
under Hitler or Soviet Union under Stalin and so on,
was based on some kind of what was considered unassailable truths.
So kind of a conceptual system, you know, if you think about it, right?
There is a beautiful episode of this series by Jacob Bronowski, you know,
where he talks about, he filmed it in Auschwitz, talking about the certainty
that what led the Nazis to killing people wholesale was a certain,
it was almost a mathematical idea.
And they just basically bought into this idea and checked out their humanity at the door.
So I would say that antidote to this type of thing is not necessarily even imagination
in a kind of elevated sense that we have been discussing today
that is exemplified by our greatest scientists and philosophers.
But just basic humanity, you know, basic human basic common sense of just like knowing that
that's just not right.
And I don't care what my, what my ideology tells me, but I'm just not going to do it.
So that I think is kind of missing a little bit in today's society,
because people get a lot to cut up in in the ideology, in certain conceptual frameworks.
So societies that lose that basic human compassion,
that basic humanity run the trouble.
Oh, very much so.
But not only society, like a human being.
And Eric is one of the people, I agree with you, keeps that flame of.
Like I trust that he will not do something that's not human.
That's not right.
I just feel that, you know, like there's some, some people you just kind of feel
that they won't cross that line.
And that's a huge thing, you know, today, because I have to say, looking back, definitely,
I have not hurt people personally, but like I could be mean, for instance, I could be harsh.
And now I see it as a sign of weakness, as a sign of insecurity.
You know, I saw, I saw your interview with Rick Kurzweil.
The other day, beautiful.
I was really moved by it.
But you know, at some point I was like, I looked at him at this sort of like Dr. Evil.
I'm kind of ashamed of it now, but like, you know, I'm kind of coming clean.
And I would, you know, because, well, why?
Because I needed an adverse adversary in my mind, because I projected onto him
kind of the fears that I had that we will be the AI will conquer us and so on.
And this was rooted in my kind of awakening moment in a sense,
a kind of a moment where I suddenly started to see the other side.
So, but I wasn't sure yet, you see.
You had to feel it.
So I had to have a fight about it.
Yeah, you had to actually have the projection.
I had to.
So it was not in, I believe that it was not in me already.
So I had to throw it onto somebody.
Yeah.
And that's not balance yet.
So balance is when you recognize that it's you, actually.
So, and I had this moment, actually.
It was so amazing.
Like, I would give this meme.
I would talk about AI and the dangers.
And he would always be my, like, foil, you know, the guy.
I would put, I would put like a sinister photograph of him on the slide.
And I was like, look at this guy.
He wants to put nanobots into your brain.
And he's also like high end, high top executive at Google and so on.
Like, so I would create this whole narrative.
And then something happened where I was giving a lecture.
This is 2015 at an Aspen.
Aspen Ideas Festival, which is a wonderful festival.
The keynote speech, actually.
And I was doing my usual stick.
And then suddenly I said, I came up to that, there was a big screen.
And there was a picture of him there.
And I came up to the screen and I kind of touched it with my hand.
And I said, but I don't want to pick on Mr. Kusawa because he's me.
I had this revelation that I'm actually fighting with myself, with my own fears.
And then I learned about his father, his father died when he was young.
And that he is, in fact, he's very discredited.
He's very sincere and upfront about it.
Self-disclosure, I think is very essential, by the way, in all this discussion.
Like, what really motivates you?
He said it publicly many times, even as early as 2015, I could find this information.
That he wanted to reunite with his father in the cloud.
And suddenly I saw him not as a caricature that exemplified all my fears,
but as a human being who, a child longing for his father, grieving for his father.
So suddenly it became a story, a love story.
And, you know, so that is, so in other words, I've seen it in myself, this
capacity to project my own fears and then fight with other people over something that actually
was my own. And as soon as I got to this point of seeing him, and then my next lecture, actually,
I talked about it, about him in this way. And I said, look, you know, it's a love story.
And he is actually, it's not how I would want to reunite with my father.
But like you said, you know, that if I am consistent, I have to allow the possibility that
different people perceive things differently. And so for him, that's his imagination.
So, you know, who is this Voltaire, I think, is ascribed to Voltaire. It's like, I disagree with
you, but I will fight to death for you to have the right to say it. So now that I feel like
my position is more like, I disagree with him, that this is the way to approach death and to
approach the death of loved ones and how we miss them and how we, you know, that sense of loneliness
and inability to interact directly, that that's not something that is nice with me.
But I think it's also, it can also be called imagination from his perspective and look
motivated by that, how much he has brought, how many interesting inventions, like his
musical invention, for instance, naturally, because his father was a composer, a music
composer and a conductor. So in other words, from a bigger scheme of things, even if I think he's
misguided. Still, I can't deny that it's certainly a leap of faith from his perspective to try to
say that this is the way we can all connect to our loved ones. And because it is sincere,
and I see it now, it's sincere. And in fact, in your interview, you really teased it out of him.
I was really moved by it, I have to say. It's like, he has melod a little bit too, I said.
It was really, really sweet when he talked about his father. And I can relate, you know,
my father died four years ago. And I can relate what a heartbreak, I was much older than Ray was
when his father died. But I can relate to this longing and that grief, you know. And when he
is somebody sincere, and he puts his, opens his cards and, you know, and says, this is why that's
what I want to do it, because I want to recreate my father and want to be able to talk to him this
way. Then we have a serious, then we understand, you know, the opposite of it would be not
disclosing. And just pretending that this is how it's supposed to be in a scientific term, so
it was replacing the real emotion, but come from the heart by some kind of a theory which comes
from the mind. And this is where we can go astray, because then we get become captives of
frameworks and conceptual systems, which may not be beneficial to our society.
In tough times, we need the people that have not lost their way in the ideologies. We need the
people who are still in touch with their heart. And you mentioned this with Eric is certainly
true. I disagree with him on a lot of stuff. But I feel like when the world is burning down,
Eric is one of the people that's you can still count on to have a heart. I've talked a lot
over the past year about the war in Ukraine and the possibility of nuclear war. And it feels like
he's one of the people I would call first, if God forbid, something like a nuclear war began,
because you look for people with a heart, no matter their ideas.
And that's right. It takes courage and it takes a certain self-awareness, I would say.
And which brings me, you know, I think the crucial is that which was inscribed, you know,
on the temple of Apollo and Delphi. There was a statement, know thyself, know yourself, you know,
like, who am I? Ultimately, it goes down to this and all these debates. And the point is that
I used to be, like I said, you know, pessimistic at some point, and I was scared even of where
development of AI was going. This is about 2014, 2015. And now I'm much more, so for instance,
after I saw Ray Kurzweil as a human being, after I could relate to him and sympathize
with him, suddenly, I stopped seeing him in the news. Like, before that, I would always see him
in the news saying, we're going to put nanobots in your brain by the year 2030, whatever, you know?
And then we upload you to the 21st, and I would be like, no, you know, the story was terrible.
Suddenly, I didn't see him anymore. I had to, you know? So now it makes me question,
who was creating the trouble? What was all with him? Was it him who was creating the
story and the trouble? Or was it my mind? You see? And so as I become, as I became self-aware,
suddenly, other possibilities opened. And suddenly, that conflict, which by the way,
if I kept giving this nasty, you know, talks about him one day, I suppose we would have a
debate. And so you have this one person stays there. And what I learned is that it never,
it's a never-ending conflict. This conflict just does not end. But there is an alternative,
there is a better way, which is to realize that it is you arguing with yourself. Now,
if you want to continue arguing with yourself, continue as long as you need. Just be careful
not to destroy too many things, you know, in the process. But there is an option of actually dropping
it, of actually dropping it. This is so, I was so surprised by this.
Yeah, it's discovering in yourself the capacity, the human capacity for compassion. And you
understand that he has a perspective, he is operating in the space of imagination, the human
being like you. And we're all in this kind of together, trying to do this.
But we want to see both, ultimately. And also it's like, with realizing how much I have screwed up,
comes this humility also. So I find it extremely hard now to really lash out at somebody
and to say like, you're horrible, whatever. Because immediately the question is,
who am I to criticize? So is there another way to have a dialogue? Is there a way to,
speaking, since we talked about the innocence of a child and how much it drives a discovery in
science and so on, I remember, I think I heard of Adyashanti who gave this nice example here,
when you're a kid, you go and you play with your friends and then you fight with another kid.
And he was like, I hate you. I don't want to see you again. And you just go home like
after half an hour, okay, what are you going to do? You want to play? So you come out, it's like,
hey, you want to play? You don't talk about what happened. You don't rehash this,
just keep going. And sometimes I think we are on the verge, maybe, of learning that.
Because I think that if we are, if we continue to push each of us, our set of ideas and like
ideologies and like, you know, what matters to us and so on, like, yeah, no, no, what matters to
you. But like, there are other ways to approach other people, there are other ways you can find
the point of contact. Speaking of which, mathematics, mathematical formulas are universal,
represent universal knowledge. 2 plus 2 is 4, whether you vote for this guy or that guy in the
election. You know, how about that as a point of contact of commonality, you know? And nobody
can patent those formulas. Did you know that? There is a Supreme Court decision that mathematical
formulas cannot be patented. Like Einstein could not patent E equals MC squared. It doesn't belong
to him because if the formula is correct, then it belongs to everyone.
So what do you think of that all too tricky question? And if you want, I can deeply bias
your answer by giving the list of four that Eric provided.
No, let me give my mind. I cannot see, by the way, what you have. But I can guess some of them.
I'm going to try to do something different from him. So I already mentioned one,
which is that you have one-dimensional numerical system, which is real numbers. You have two
dimensional, which is complex numbers. You have four-dimensional. It's probably connected to
what he wrote because it has to do with some homotopy groups of spheres and stuff like that.
Then, of course, one I love, okay? 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 plus 5 plus 6 and so on.
Does it make any sense? The sum. You probably heard about this one. It became very popular at
some point. 1 plus 2 plus 3, I did a video for a number file, the YouTube channel about it maybe
10 years ago. So 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 plus 5 ostensibly diverges, goes to infinity because
you get a bigger and bigger number. And yet there is a way to make sense of it in which it comes up to
minus 1 over 12. How fascinating. First of all, the answer is not even a positive number and it's
not an integer. It's not a whole number. It's minus 1 over 12. So sometimes people ask me,
what is your favorite number? And it's a kind of a joke. I say minus 1 over 12. It's actually 42.
So your favorite number is not in order to set. Right. So what else? What else?
The language program, of course. I have to mention that. And we'll explore that in depth. Do you
know what Eric said? Sure. Sphere, aversion, boys, surface, hop, vibration, and pi 1 of SO3.
Okay. Oh, yes. So that's the famous cup trick, you know? Okay, look. So this is how it works.
No tricks. No tricks. No magic. It is magical, okay? But not because I'm tricking you. So you
start with a bottle like this, or a cup, and you start twisting it. And at the same time,
you twist your arm. Then you come. So this is actually going to rotate at 360 degrees full
turn. Then you say, okay, I won't be able to do another turn because then my arm would really
get twisted. I'll have to go see a dog. Yet, if I do it second time, it untwists.
This is the pi 1 of SO3 Eric is talking about. Yes. So there is something where
the first motion is not trivial, but if you double down on it, you come back to the initial
position. It's very closely connected to the fact that we have elementary particles of two types,
bosons and fermions. So bosons are, for example, photons or carriers of other forces,
or the Higgs boson. It is called a boson for a reason because it is a boson in honor of
Indian mathematician Bose, B O S E and Einstein. So these particles obey what's called Bose-Einstein
statistics. But then there are other particles called fermions in honor of Enrico Fermi,
Italian born mathematician who worked in the US. And they follow what's called Dirac Fermi
statistics. And those are electrons and constituents of matter, electrons, protons,
neutrons, and so on. And they have a certain duplicity, if you will. And that duplicity is
rooted mathematically in this experiment, this little experiment that they have just done.
So I can, I imagine, speaking of imagination, okay, so I'm just kind of riffing on this.
I imagine a world in which this will not be shocking or like, in this case, it's not even
shocking because I haven't really explained the details, because I can't do it in two minutes.
I indicated what this is all about and so on. But imagine a world in which this is not foreign
to most people, that most people have seen it before, or they're not afraid to approach this
type of questions. Because, you know, we talked a little bit about math education, but I really
believe that a lot of people in our society, and it is not only in the United States, but throughout
the world, a lot of people have been traumatized. It's really PTSD. That's why people, when they
see math, make a formula, or like, even like, how do they need to calculate tip on the bill?
They just, they're terrified because it brings up those memories when they were kids and being
called to Blackboard and solve a problem, you can't solve a problem. And unscrupulous teacher
says, you're an idiot, sit down, and you feel ashamed and, and, and, you know, lonely. And that
stays with you. And so I think that, unfortunately, that's where we are. But I want a dream. And so
my dream is that one day we'll be able to overcome this. And actually, all of these treasures of
mathematics will become widely, widely available, or at least people will know where to find them.
And they will not be afraid of going there and looking. And I think this will help because,
like I said, for one thing, it gives you a sense of belonging. It gives you, it kind of is an antidote
to the kind of alienation and separation that we feel today, oftentimes, because of ideological
divide, sectarian strife and all kinds of things like that. Because then you will, once you see
there's a critical mass of this beauty that kind of like dawns on you is like, my God,
this is what we all have in common.
You mentioned Langlands program. We have to talk about it.
Sure.
At the core of your book and your work is the Langlands program. Can you describe what it is?
Sure. So Langlands is a mathematician. It's a name of a mathematician, Robert Langlands.
Canadian born, still alive. He was a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study that we
talked about, where Einstein and Gödel and other great scientists have worked.
In fact, he used to occupy the office of Albert Einstein at the Institute for Advanced Study.
So he, in the late 60s, he came up with a set of ideas which captivated a lot of
mathematicians, several generations of mathematicians by now, which came to be known as the Langlands
program. And what it is about is connecting different fields of mathematics, which seem
to be far away from each other. For example, number three, which, as the name suggests,
deals with numbers and various equations with, you know, like x squared plus y squared equals one.
And on the other side, harmonic analysis, something that any music lover can appreciate,
because the sound of a symphony can be kind of decomposed into sounds of different instruments,
and each of those sounds can be represented by a wave like this, like a sine function.
Those are the harmonics. They actually, the period of a harmonic periods of different
notes are different. They correspond to different notes and different instruments,
different semitones, if you will. But they all combine together into something special,
which cannot be reduced to any one of those. So mathematically, it's the idea that you can
decompose a signal as a collection, as a simultaneous oscillation of several elementary
signals. That's called harmonic analysis. So what Langlands found is that some really difficult
questions in number theory can be translated into much more easily tractable questions in
harmonic analysis. That was his initial idea. But what happened next surprised everybody,
that the kind of patterns that he was able to observe, the kind of regularities that he was
able to observe, which were quite surprising, were subsequently found in other areas of mathematics.
For example, in geometry, and eventually in quantum physics. So in fact, Ed Whitton,
who is kind of a dean of modern theoretical physicists, Professor at the Institute for
Advanced Study as well, got interested in this subject. I described in my book how it happened,
and he was instrumental in bridging the gap between these patterns in
quantum physics and in geometry, finding kind of a substratum, a kind of a super stratum,
if you will. It's kind of a way to connect these two things, kind of a bridge between these two
fields. So subsequently, I collaborate with Whitton on this, and this has been one of the
major themes of my research. I always found it interesting to connect things, to unite things.
When I was younger, I couldn't understand why, but I was always interested in
when not in working in a specific field, but kind of cutting across fields.
And then I would discover that, for instance, I talked to some people who know what happens
in this field, but don't know what happens in the other field, or conversely. And then I would
find it imperative to go out and explain to them the different sides what this is all about,
so that more people are aware of these hidden structures, of these hidden parallels, if you
will. So that has been sort of a theme in my research. And so I guess now I kind of understand
more why it's kind of a balance, like what we talked about earlier.
So can you elucidate a little bit how, what are the mathematical tools that allow you to connect
these different continents of mathematics? Is there something you can convert into words
that Languages was able to find, and you were able to explore further?
I would say what it suggests is that there is some hidden principles, which we still don't
understand. My view is that we still don't know why, that we can prove some instances of these
correspondences and connections. But we still don't know the real underlying reasons,
which means that there is a certain layer beneath the surface that we see now.
The way I see it now is like this, that there is something three-dimensional like this bottle,
but what we are seeing is this projection onto the table and the projection to a wall.
And then we can map things from one projection to another and say, oh my god, that's incredible.
But the real explanation is that both of them are projections of the same thing,
and that we haven't found yet. But that's what I want to find. So that's what motivates me,
I would say. From number theory to geometry to quantum physics. So there is this one thing
which has different projections, except it's not just the table and the wall, but there are like
many different walls, if you will. So what is the philosophical implication that there is
commonalities like that across these very disparate fields? It means that what we believe
are the fundamental elements of mathematics, are not fundamental. There is something beyond. It's like
we previously thought that atoms were indivisible. Then we found out that there is nucleus and
electrons, and the nucleus consists of protons and neutrons. Then we thought, okay, protons and
neutrons must be elementary. Now we know they consist of quarks. So it's about kind of finding the
quarks of mathematics. Of course, beyond that, there's maybe even more. Which was my initial
motivation to study mathematics, by the way, right? Quarks was the first time you fell in love with
understanding the nature of reality. What was it like working with Ed Whitton, who many people say
one of the smartest humans in history, or at least mathematical physicists in history?
Yes. Fascinating. I enjoyed it very much. I also felt they have to keep up.
So we wrote this long paper in 2007 and collaborated for about a year. I have known
him before, and we talked before, and we have seen him since. But it's very different to just
meet somebody at conferences and have a conversation as opposed to actually working on a project
together. So he's very serious, very focused. This is one thing which I have to say. I was really
struck by this. Why is he considered to be such a powerful intellect by many other powerful
intellects? He has had a unique vision of the subject. He was able to connect different things,
especially find connections between quantum physics and mathematics. Almost unparalleled.
I don't think anyone comes close, in some sense, in the last 50 years to him, in terms of finding
just consistently time after time, breaking new ground. One way one could describe it is
he would take some idea in physics and then find an interpretation of it in mathematics,
and then say, distill it, present it in mathematical terms, and tell mathematicians,
this should be like that, kind of like 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 is minus 1 over 12.
And mathematics should be like, no way. And then it would pan out, and mathematicians would then
a whole industry would be created of groups of mathematicians trying to prove his conjectures
and his ideas, and he would always be proven right. So in other words, being able to
glean some mathematical truths from physical theories, that's one side.
On the other hand, conversely, applying sophisticated mathematics, he's probably
the physicist who could learn mathematics the fastest, I don't think. Some younger
physicists maybe could come close, but it's still quite a long way to go to get to be
comparable to Whitton, to take some of the most sophisticated mathematics
and not learn it to the point where it becomes a practitioner of the subject practically,
and then use it to gain some new insights on the physics side. Now, of course, the thing is that
the theory is that physics, one could say, is in a sort of a crisis in some sense because of
current gap between the sophisticated theories, which came from applying
sophisticated mathematics and the actual universe. So we have theories, for instance,
we describe 10 dimensional worlds, 10 dimensional space time coming from string theory,
and things like that. But we don't know yet how to apply it to understanding our universe.
A lot of progress has been made, but it's kind of at a kind of an impasse right now. And at the same
time, our most realistic theories, most advanced theories of the four dimensional universe are
in contradiction with each other. The standard model describing the three known forces of nature,
electromagnetic, strong and weak, it was great accuracy, and Einstein's relativity,
and Einstein's relativity, which describes the fourth called gravity. Everybody above a certain
age knows that one. So these two theories are in contradiction at the moment. And string theory
was one of the, the promise of string theory was that it would unify those two. And so far,
it has not, has not happened. So we are kind of at a very interesting place right now. And
I think that new ideas, perhaps I needed, and I wouldn't be surprised if written is one of
those people who come up with those ideas. Well, he has been one of the, one of the people that
added a lot of ideas under the flag of string theory. What do you think about this theory?
What do you think is beautiful about it? String theory? Well, first of all, kind of
remember, we talked about Pythagoreans and how for Pythagoreans, the whole world was
that the symphony where you have this different vibrations of all the humans, every human is
a vibration every, every animal, you know, every being, every tree, and every celestial body and
so on. So string theory is kind of like that, because in string theory, there is this fundamental
object, which is a vibrating string. And all particles are in a sense supposed to be different
modulations or vibrations of that string. So that by itself is already interesting, that you
kind of describe this diversity of various particles and interactions between them,
using one guiding principle, in some sense. But also just the mathematical things that come out
of it, the kind of, it looks impossible to satisfy various constraints. And then there is sort of
like a unique way to do it. So that's sort of the, every time that happens when, you know,
you have some system over, like overdetermined system, let's suppose you have to do like five
interviews in one day, and you wake up in the morning and you're like, that's impossible.
Because then so many things have to align. For instance, let's suppose you have to go from
one place to another. So then you have a commute, and then who knows, maybe there is a traffic jam
and stuff like that. And now suppose that it all works seamlessly, and there were like a bunch
of places where it could have gone hopelessly wrong, and it didn't. And then in the evening,
you're like, wow, it worked. That's beautiful, right? That's kind of like a great luck, you know,
I would say. But in science, this happens sometimes, that you have this theory which is not supposed
to work, because there are so many, seemingly contradictory demands on it. And yet there is
a sweet spot where they balance each other. So string theory is kind of like this. The unfortunate
aspect of it is that it balances itself in 10 dimensions and not in four. So maybe there is
another universe somewhere. But see, as a mathematician, for me, all spaces are created equal.
10 dimensional, four dimensional. So mathematicians love string theory, because it has given us so
much food for thought. But do you think it's a correct or a incorrect theory for understanding
this reality? So might be a theory that explains some 10th dimensional reality in some other universe,
but is it potentially, what do you think are the odds? Again, financial advice is your to bet.
What do you think are the odds that it gets us closer to understanding this reality?
Well, in the form that it is now, that seems unlikely. But it could well be that based on
these ideas, with some modifications, with some essential new elements, it could work out. So
I would say right now it doesn't look so good. Like from the point of view that we, from what
we know. But maybe somebody will come and introduce like square root of negative one.
I mean, they already introduced, but I mean kind of like as a metaphor. Maybe somebody will come
and say, what if we do this? It looks crazy. You know, speaking of Niels Bohr,
he had this famous quote that he said to somebody,
there is no doubt that your theory is crazy. The question is whether it's crazy enough
to describe reality. So that's where we are kind of, you know. Speaking of crazy and crazy enough,
let me ask for therapy, for advice, for wisdom in returning to Eric Weinstein and maybe give
some guidance to understanding his view on his attempt at theory of everything that he called
geometric unity, that he told me that you may have some inkling of an understanding of. If you were
to describe this theory to aliens that visited earth, how would you do it? Or you could try
if it was just me visiting earth. How would you describe your best understanding of it?
He shared with me some of it when I was in New York at Columbia, like 11 years ago.
We actually spent a lot of time where he explained to me and I found it beautiful.
He has a very original idea at the core of it, where you have this instead of four dimensional,
instead of 10 dimensional, he has 14 dimensional space. And I thought it was really original.
And this exactly goes to the point I made earlier that we need new ideas.
I feel that without some fundamentally new idea, we won't be able to get closer to
understanding our universe. Now, I have a problem with the whole idea of theory of everything,
you know. I don't believe that one exists, nor that we should
aim to construct one. And I think it's really not to offend anybody, but it's ultimately
a fault of education system of physicists. Like in mathematics, we're not brought up,
we're not educated as mathematicians with the idea that one day we will come up with the theory
of everything. Even though, as a joke, I said that Langland's program is mathematical theory of
everything, but I made it kind of tongue in cheek. But isn't it a little bit kind of that?
It's not really, because first of all, it doesn't cover all fields of mathematics,
and it covers specific phenomena. But isn't it spiritually striving
towards the same platonic form of the theory of everything? Like connecting. Connecting.
But connecting doesn't mean that it covers everything, right? So you could connect two
things and then you have infinitely many other things which are outside of the purview of this
connection. That's how it is in mathematics, I feel. And I would venture to say that
most mathematicians look at it this way. Like there is no idea that somehow,
I think it's actually impossible, because we're not talking about such a thing as like one
universe. We're talking about all possible universes of all possible dimensions and so on.
It is just not feasible to have unified everything in one equation.
Now physicists, on the other hand, have been brought up educated for decades with this idea.
And to me, and I'm not sure I should say that, but I feel like it's kind of an ultimate ego trip.
So that I have come up with the unified. I have found the unitary theory of everything. It's me
and it's my name will be on it. I think a lot of physicists get educated this way, especially men,
take it seriously. And I've seen that happen and I think it is counterproductive. I think that a
lot of people agree that this debate is kind of, I feel like it's kind of settled. I hear it less
and less, but I disagree with the whole premise. So you, it's interesting because both are interesting
points you made, which is you don't think a theory of everything exists and you don't think the pursuit
of a theory of everything is good. So I think you spoke to the second thing, which is basically
that the pursuit of a theory of everything becomes like a drug to the human ego.
That's right. So it is a huge motivating factor. I don't deny that, but I feel that it's, there are
better ways to motivate people than like that, than this way. Okay. So I would say, for instance,
if one, because then it's not a game of winner takes all in some sense. And in fairness, when
physicists say theory of everything, grant unified theory, they mean something very specific,
which is unifying the standard model and Einstein's relativity theory, which is the theory of gravity.
So they don't necessarily, a lot of physicists may say these words, but they don't really mean them.
I think it's important to realize that, that in my opinion, that's not productive and it's not
feasible anyway. So having said that, there are some theories are better than others, obviously.
So for instance, Eric's theory has, as far as I understand, does have a certain way of producing
some of the elementary particles that we see, and as well as the force of gravity. So it does
have that promise. I feel that from, at least from the place where I had seen it about 10 years ago,
it still required a lot of work to get to the point of actually saying that it does work because,
you know, a lot, there are a lot of elements. It's a huge enterprise to have a theory because
you have just to describe the fields, sort of the building blocks of the theory. It's already
tremendous undertaking. And he's trying to do it for curved spaces in greater generality, which is
what makes it so unique and so beautiful. But then there are, on top of that, there are this issue
of quantization of actually describing them as quantum field theory. And the quantum field theory,
even as a language, as a framework is currently incomplete, in my opinion, and not only my
opinion, it's like everybody agrees on that. It's a collection of tricks, so to speak. It's
a collection of tools. It's a toolbox, but it is not a consistent rigorous theory, like number
theory in mathematics. Physicists have still been able to derive predictions from it and
confirm them with the great accuracy. But the underpinnings, it doesn't have the
real rigorous foundation from a mathematical perspective. So in that sense, even if in that
framework a new theory could lead to an explanation of some, some new explanation of some phenomena,
it would still be incomplete, in a sense, because it wouldn't be mathematically rigorous,
you see what I mean. Because the whole framework is not yet on a firm foundation.
So it's not consistent. Why is it that the universe should have? So that's
to your first point. Do you think the universe has a beautiful clean when you show up and meet
God and there's one equation on the board and the two of you just chuckle? Do you think such
equation exists? Yeah, there are such equations. For instance, let's say I am interested in a
particular question, right? So in the language program, so moving away from physics, so let's
talk about math. So in the context of language program, I have recently developed with my
co-authors, Aitengov and Kashdan, a kind of a new strength, a new flavor of the language program,
if you will. But so far, it's a sort of, it's a vision. It's a set of conjectures,
which we have proved in some cases, but not in full generality. So yes, I would like to
use your framework for me, the creator, and ask her, what is the explanation of this?
And it may well be that you will answer in a way that I will just burst out laughing,
it's like, how could we not see it? You see? So that I totally see. But I don't see one equation
governing, one equation governing them all. Not one equation governing them all, but it does seem
that such equations exist, where she will tell you something and you look back and say, how could I
not see it? It seems like the truth at the end of the day is simple. That we're seeking, especially
through mathematics. It seems somehow simple. The nature of reality, the thing that governs it
seems to be simple. I wonder why that is. And I also wonder if it's not totally incorrect,
and we're just craving the simplicity. And then mixing into the whole conversation about how much
the observer that craves simplicity is part of the answer. It's a whole big giant mess.
Or a whole big, beautiful painting or symphony. You said of Eric Weinstein that I find it
remarkable that Eric was able to come up with such beautiful and original ideas,
even though he has been out of academia for so long, doing wonderful things in other areas,
such as economics and finance. I'd like to use that kind of quote as just a question to you about
different places where people of your level can operate inside academia and outside. What is
the difference of doing mathematics inside academia and outside? Not even mathematics,
but developing beautiful original ideas. Where's the place that your imagination can flourish most?
So the limitations of academia is there's a community of people that take a set of axioms
as gospel. So it's harder to take that leap into the unknown. But it's also the nice thing about
academia is some of the most brilliant people in the world are there. And it's that community.
Both the competition and the collaboration is there. I wonder if there's something you could
say sort of to further about this world that people might not be familiar with.
But I think you gave a very good description. I'm not sure I can on it because I don't have
an overarching theory of academia. I definitely have been part of it and I'm grateful because
it gives you a great sense of security, which comes with its own downside too,
because you kind of like get a little disconnected from the real world because
you get tenure, so you feel financially secure. You know, they don't pay you that much,
so to speak, you know, relatively speaking. And it's comfortable, but it's not that much.
But you can't be fired. So there is something about this, which I definitely have benefit from it,
you know, and it does. People are not even aware what it's like to live outside of where you don't
have this type of security. On the other hand, that also means that we're lacking certain skills
that sort of real people in the real world have developed out of necessity to deal with that sort
of insecurity. So it kind of always cuts both ways. You know, in one hand, it gives, and with
other hand, it takes away. And it's a very interesting setup. And also, on the one hand,
we are all supposed to be the true seekers. And but in reality, of course, it is a human
activity, and it is a human community with all kinds of good, bad, and ugly things that happen,
a lot of them under the radar screen, so to speak. And so, but maybe there is something to it.
There is definitely, there are definitely people who are upholding kind of that old tradition,
definitely. And that is inspiring. And I aspire to be, you know, one of those to my best. So,
whether this is a system that will stay or should stay, I don't know. I really don't know.
That's really fast. Yeah, it's fascinating what, especially with it, just to introduce the
bit of AI poison into the mix, as that changes the nature of education, perhaps as well,
what the role of the university is in the next 10, 20, 50, 100 years. I wonder,
I wonder, and I wonder that, you know, how do you make sense that Einstein was working
after attempting, I believe, to be a university professor?
For the patent office. Yeah, as a patent clerk.
But I have to say, to these days, the science has become so much faster. It is really hard
to do it being outside. Now, Eric is unique in this way, even though he did, you know,
go to great undergraduate and graduate, you know, schools, but then worked for a while in academia.
There are very few examples like that. There's Yutong Zhang, who proved an important conjecture
number theory about 10 years ago, and is now, as I understand it, is a professor at UC Santa Barbara.
He worked outside of academia and was able to make tremendous advance on his own.
This case is exceedingly rare, in part because academia is trying to protect its turf and it's
kind of it's it's creating the sort of prohibitive cost of of an outsider. That is true. But there
is also something about how much how much concentration in mathematics. I don't think
people who are not who are not in the field understand what kind of focus
and concentration actually doing like mathematics at top level these days requires.
Because we're not talking about something that is more or less good. It is something which
unassailable, you know, it's finding this treasure at the bottom of the ocean, you know, without
you know, that column, you know, without oxygen. And that's why, you know, it's it's not people go
crazy sometimes, you know, but there is a reason for that. Well, let me let me ask you about that
sort of just to linger on that the amount of concentration required.
Cal Newport wrote a book called Deep Work. He's a theoretical computer scientist.
He took quite seriously the the task of allocating the hours in the day for that kind of deep
thinking and then the mathematicians is is theoretical computer scientists on steroids.
So for your own life and what you've observed, let me ask the big question, how to think,
how to think deeply, how to find the mental, psychological,
pragmatic space to really sit there and think deeply. How do you do it? In the moment you
remember what you really deeply thought, what was it an accident? Was it deliberate?
No, it's deliberate because, you know, first of all, my first years as a mathematician, you know,
I worked every day, weekends, holidays, doesn't matter.
I didn't even question that. So I would feel something's missing if I took a day off.
And, you know, so it was just a kind of a sustained effort. The point is that
still the process is nonlinear to go back to what we discussed earlier, that in other words,
the way I see it is you just you are making an effort to to bring all the information into
focus, what you believe is correct. And you're playing with different
ways of connecting things. But it is a total miracle when it when suddenly there is
inside strikes. It is not something that in my experience could be predicted
or even anticipated, you know, or like brought closer. There is a famous story about Einstein
that he used to, you know, go think, think, think and then go for a walk. And like he would whistle
and sometimes. So I remember the first time I heard this story, I thought how interesting is what
the coincidence that he this came to him when he was with them. But in fact, it's not this is how
it works in some sense that you have to prepare for it. But then the moment it happens when you
stop thinking, actually, the moment of discovery is the moment when thinking stops. And, you know,
you kind of almost become that truth that you're seeking. But you cannot do it by will in some
sense. It's kind of like, you know, how in the Eastern tradition, they have this concept of
Satori, like in Buddhism, in Zen Buddhism, Satori, which is enlightenment. And so the various reports
of Buddhist monks or Buddhist masters who have had experience Satori. But they say you can't
do it by will. You cannot make it happen. If anything, you have to relax to let it come to
you, you know, it's kind of like that. It's kind of like that. So
I think that what matters, but you say how to think, the point is that we're talking about
such an esoteric area. Mathematics is really esoteric area. It's a really strange subject where you
try to to fit everything in this very, very stringent set of rules, to obey those set of those
rules. Isn't it basically the pure, the hardest manifestation of a puzzle that we're all solving
in different other disciplines? But this is the hardest puzzle. But yes or no, because there is
just a different, for instance, there is a different criterion for what constitutes progress.
For instance, in physics, a lot of arguments they make, they are not rigorous from a mathematical
perspective. It is kind of an intuitive argument. We think it is like this. And this is acceptable
in the subject for a good reason. And so there is some play. It's more like human activity,
day-to-day activity. For instance, you and I discuss something. You have an idea and I have
an idea and we argue about it. And something seems more plausible. Something seems less plausible.
And so we may decide to take this point of view or that point of view as a provisional sort of
point of view and go with it. In mathematics, it doesn't work this way. You either prove it or
you don't. And oftentimes, you get to the point where there is this much you need to prove and
it just wouldn't come to you. And you just don't see it and it can go on for months.
Super frustrating. But without it, it is nothing kind of, you know?
I would love to hear your opinion to the degree that you know it of the proof of Fermat's last
theorem by Andrew Wiles, which seems to have this element perhaps for years. To the degree that
you know, perhaps can you explain Fermat's last theorem and what your thoughts are in the process
that Andrew Wiles took that seemed to, at least from my sort of romantic perspective, seem to be
very lonely. Yes. It's a lonely profession. And hopeless. And sort of you put it really nicely
because it feels like there's a lot of moments where you feel like you're close. You feel like
99% is done. And there is this one stubborn thing which just does not compute, you know,
doesn't happen. And you're trying to find that push for this last link. And nobody knows how
long it's going to take. Would it be useful to maybe try to explain Fermat's last theorem?
Sure. It's easy to do. I am an optimist. I'm an optimist. I think I always think that everything
can be explained, you know? Even though I say that not everything can be explained. But in
mathematics, you know, within this particular framework, I think that I always feel optimistic
when people ask me to explain something. I always start with the assumption that they will understand.
So let's try. Fermat's last theorem, one of the jewels sort of of mathematics of all time.
A beautiful story also behind it. Pierre Fermat, a great French mathematician who lived in the
mostly worked at the beginning of the 17th century. And he actually has to his credit a number of
important contributions. But the most famous is called Fermat's last theorem, or Fermat's great
theorem. And the reason why it became so famous is in part because he actually claimed to have
proved it himself. And he did it on the margin of a book that he was reading, which was actually
an important book by Diophantus about equations with coefficients in whole numbers. And he wrote
on the margin literally, this equation, you know, this problem, which I will explain in a moment.
I have solved it. I have found a proof. But this margin is too small to contain it.
At some point, I was giving a public talk about this, and I made it as a joke. I made a tweet
in which I wrote that I have proved this theorem, but 280 characters are not enough and it kind of
cuts me in mid-sentence. So this was 17th century Twitter style proof. But a lot of mathematicians
took it seriously because he had great credibility. He did make some major contributions. And the
search was on. So for 350 years, about 350 years, it remained unproved with many people trying
and failing until in 1994, no, in 1993, Andrew Wiles announced a mathematician from Princeton
University announced the proof. And it was very exciting because he was one of the top number
theorists in the world. And unfortunately, about a year later, a gap was found. So that's exactly
what we were talking about earlier. You have 99% of the proof. This one little thing does not quite
connect. And this nullifies the whole thing. Even though, well, you could say we have some
interesting ideas, but it's not the same as actually having a proof. So he apparently was
really frustrated. And he was really a lot of people thought that it's going to be another 100
years or whatever. And then luckily, he was able to enlist with the help assistance of his
former student, also great number theorist, Richard Taylor, they were able to do that 1%
so to speak. Well, some people might say it may be not one, but 5% or whatever. But it definitely was
an important ingredient, but it was not he had a sort of like a big new set of ideas. And this one
thing didn't pan out. They were able to close it with Taylor. And it finally was published and I
think was accepted and read in 95. And since it's believed to be correct. Now, what he proved,
actually, was not Fermat's theorem itself. But a certain statement, which is called
Shimura Taniyama way conjecture named after three mathematicians to Japanese mathematicians in one
French porn mathematician who worked in also the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
And it was my colleague at UC Berkeley, Ken Ribbit, who in the 80s connected the two problems.
So this is how it often works in mathematics. You want to prove statement A.
Instead, you prove that a is equivalent to B. So after that, if you can prove B,
this would automatically imply that A is correct. So this is what happened here.
A was Fermat's last theorem. B was Shimura Taniyama way conjecture. And that's what
Andrew Wiles and Richard Taylor really proved. So it requires to get to Fermat's last theorem,
it requires that bridge, which was established by my colleague Ken Ribbit at UC Berkeley.
So now what is the statement of Fermat's last theorem?
Let me start with Pythagoras. Since we already talked about it, let me start with Pythagoras
theorem, which describes the right triangles. So what is the right triangle? It's a triangle in
which one of the angles is 90 degrees like this. So it has three sides. The longer side is called
hypotenuse. And then there's two other sides. So if we denote the length of hypotenuse by z
and the two other sides x and y, then z squared is equal to x squared plus y squared.
So that's the equation. Or x squared plus y squared equals z squared. And it turns out
that this equation has solutions in natural numbers, actually infinitely many solutions
in natural numbers. For example, if x equals 3, y equals 4, and z equals 5, then they solve
this equation because 3 squared is 9. 4 squared is 16. 9 plus 16 is 25. And that's 5 squared.
So x squared plus y squared equals z squared is solved by x equals 3, y equals 4, z equals 5.
And there are many other solutions of that nature.
And we should say that natural numbers are whole numbers that are non-negative.
That's right. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on. Now what's Fermat's last theorem? Fermat asked what
about what will happen if we replace squares by cubes, for example. So x cube plus y cube equals z
cube. Are there any solutions in what do you call natural numbers? It turns out there are none.
What about fourth powers? Again, none. Or it seems like none, right? So that was a statement.
So the theorem says that the equation x cube plus y cube equals z cube has no solutions in natural
numbers. Remember, natural means positive whole numbers. So of course, there is a trivial solution
0, 0, 0, so that this works. But you need all of them to be positive. x to the fourth plus y to the
fourth equals z to the fourth also has no solutions. x to the fifth plus y to the fifth
equals z to the fifth, no solutions. So you kind of see the trend. x to the n plus y to the n
equals z to the n. If n is greater than 2, has no solutions in natural numbers. That is a statement
of Fermat's last theorem. Deceptively simple. As far as famous theorems are concerned,
you don't need to know anything beyond standard arithmetic, addition and multiplication of natural
numbers. That's why a lot of people, both specialists and amateurs, try to prove it because
it's so easy to formulate. So in fact, I think Fermat proved the case of cubes. I think he did
actually prove some elsewhere the case of cubes. But so it remained like fourth. There are infinitely
many cases, right? You have to, even if you prove it for cubes and for fourth power and fifth,
then still there are six, seven, and so on. There are infinitely many cases in which it has to be
proved. And so you see, the Deceptively Simple result took 350 years to prove. And you know,
but in a sense, it's like mathematicians, you know, you would think mathematics is such a sterile
profession. Everybody's so serious, you know, almost like we're all wearing like lab coats
and like take an elevator to the every tower. And however, look at all this drama.
Look at all this drama. It's like we also like drama. We also have narratives. We also have our
myths. Here is a guy is a 16th century mathematician or 17th century mathematician who leaves a note
on the margin and motivates others to find the proof. Then how many hearts were broken that they
believed that they found the proof. And then later it was realized that the proof was incorrect
and so on and brings us to modern day. And one last attempt, Andrew Wiles, who is very serious
and respected and esteemed mathematician, announces the proof only to be faced with the same reality
of his hopes dashed, seemingly dashed. And like, there is a mistake. It doesn't work. And then to
be able to recover a year later, how much drama in this one story. It's amazing. But from what
you understand, from what you know, what was the process for him that is similar, perhaps,
to your own life of walking along with the problem for months, not years?
Yes. So he worked, he has given interviews about it afterwards. So we know that he described his
process that number one, he did not want to tell anybody because he was afraid that people find
out that he's working on it. Because he was such a top level mathematician, people would guess that
he has some idea that there is some idea. So, you know, if you just know that somebody has an idea,
this already gives you a great boost of confidence, right? So he didn't want people to have that
information. So he didn't tell anybody that he was working on it. Number one, be lonely. Number two,
he worked on it for seven years, if I remember correctly, by himself. And then he thought he
had it and he was elated. Obviously, he was, you know, very happy. And he announced it at a conference,
I think it was in Cambridge University or Oxford University in the UK in 1993, I believe. So,
you know, this is really interesting because all of us, all mathematicians can relate to this,
because I remember very well my first problem, how I solved my first problem. I described it in
Love and Math in my book. So it was, I was, how old was I? I was 18 years old. I was a student in
Moscow. And I was just, I just lucked out that I was introduced to this great mathematician.
Since I, you know, I was not studying at Moscow University because of anti-Semitism in the Soviet
Union. So I was in this technical school, but I was lucky that I had a mathematician who took me
under his wing. And Dmitry Fuchs, who actually later came to the US and he's still a professor at
UC Davis, actually, not so far from me. So he gave me this problem and it was rather technical,
so I will not try to describe it. But I do remember how much effort, you know, that excitement,
but also kind of a fear, what if I don't have what it takes, you know? I lost sleep. So this
was one consequence of this. I, for the first time in my life, I had trouble falling asleep. And
this actually stayed for a couple of years afterwards. So then it was kind of like a wake-up
call that I should be to take care of myself, not work too late and so on. So that was sort of like
that experience. And I was lucky that I was able to find a solution, number one, within two months,
maybe. And it was very, it was surprising and it was beautiful. Like it, the answer was, was in
terms of some, something which seemed to be from a different world, from a different area of mathematics.
So I was very happy. But I do remember this moment when suddenly you see that. Just like
in this case, it was literally, I had to compile these diagrams with what mathematicians call
cohomology groups and spectral sequences and manually calculate some numbers and trying
to discern some system in it. And suddenly I saw that how they all were governed by this one,
one force, so to speak, one pattern. And that was absolutely, wow. So it's like...
Maybe what was it? So you're sitting there at a desk?
Actually, you know, I lived in a town outside of Moscow. So I used to take, I would take a train
to Moscow. So it's what we call in Russia, electric, you know, like this electric train,
which was super slow. It took more than two hours to cover that distance. And I think that
the crucial insight came when I was in this. And I just, I had to contain myself so I don't
start screaming, you know, because there were other passengers in the car. So I was sitting there
and staring at this paper. So you know what? I remember that's what came to me. I have something
now, which nobody else in the world has. I have a proof of... First of all, it was not just a proof.
Like in the case of Fermat, the statement is already made. That's why it's called conjecture.
You know, you make a statement, you don't have a proof yet. Then you try to prove it. In my case,
I did not know what the answer would be. There was a type of question where the answer was unknown.
So I had to find the answer and prove it. And the answer was very nice. So nobody knew, as far
as I could tell, nobody knew because my teacher told me that he explored all the literature. And
this was not known. So this was... Suddenly I felt that I was in possession of this. Now,
it was a little thing. It was not cure for cancer. It was not a large language model.
But it was something undeniably real, meaningful. And it was mine kind of. I had it, nobody else.
I had not published it. I didn't even tell anybody. And it is a very strange feeling to have that.
Were you worried that this treasure could be stolen?
Not at the time. Not at the time. So later on, there were situations where
I was exposed to those types of experiences. But at that time, I didn't think of that. I was
still this starry-eyed kid who was just obsessed with mathematics, with this beauty and discovering
those beautiful facts, beautiful results. So I didn't even think that it could be possible
that somebody could steal it or whatever. I just wanted to share it with my teacher as soon as
possible. And he understood quickly. And he's like, good job.
Is there something you can give color to the drama? Eric Weinstein has spoken about
some of the challenges, some of the triumphs and challenges of his time at Harvard.
Is there something to that drama of people stealing each other's ideas or not allocating
credit enough? Oh, sure. Yes. All of that and creating psychological stressors because of that.
Happens all the time, yes, unfortunately. On young minds and so on.
Could have a very bad effect. Is that just the way of life or is this...
I think we can definitely do better. And I think the first step is to kind of
admit that we are not 100% seekers of truth, that we are human beings and all the
good and bad and the ugly qualities can be present and to have some kind of dialogue
in my subject, in mathematics. This has not happened yet. There have been some famous cases
where people have been accused, which had been resolved or partially resolved or unresolved.
And everybody knows it, but there isn't a systematic effort, as far as I can tell,
of really trying to create some rules, some ethics rules. This is fair game,
this is not fair game, so that as a community, we strive to get better. I think that for most
people it's more like keeping your head in the sand and kind of pretending that it doesn't happen.
Or it happens some isolated incidents. Well, my experience is not like that at all.
I think it does happen much more often than it should. That's my opinion.
So there's the pool of academia is fascinating. One of the reasons I really love it is you have
young minds with fresh ideas. And that same innocence you had when you first on the train
have that brilliant breakthrough. And then you throw that in together with senior,
exceptional world-class scientists who have, first of all, are getting older.
Second of all, maybe they have partaken in the drug of fame and money and status and recognition.
So that starts to a little bit corrupt all of our human minds. And you throw that mix in together.
Mostly without rules. And it's beautiful because that's where the ideas of old
contend with the new wild-eyed crazy ideas and they clash and there's a tension and there's
a dance to it. But then there's the old human corruption that can take advantage of the young
minds. It's unclear what to do with that. I mean, part of that is just the way of life
and there's tragedies. And oftentimes when you look at who wins the Nobel Prize, it's also tragic
because sometimes so many minds are, the trajectory to the breakthrough idea
involves so many different minds, young and old. Yeah, I mean,
you're right. I think it's like everything else. The path is to more self-awareness.
And that's like owning up your own stuff and not blaming other people, not projecting onto other
people, but taking responsibility. And that's true for everything. And the problem here,
unique problem for mathematics, I would say thesis and chemists are better. They actually
have better sort of ethical rules and so on, especially biologists. Because I think in part
it's because there is much more money involved, because they have to get grants and so on. So
for them, the question of priority, who discovered what first is much more serious because there's
really some serious money. Mathematics, who cares? You know, like Fermat's last theorem was proved.
Did Andrew Wiles become a millionaire? No. I think he got a prize.
He won a prize, but those prizes are not... I think that one was a big prize, but in general,
there's not going to be... I think he won the Nobel Prize, eventually, which is about a million
dollars. But sometimes I joke about this, that this is the hardest way to win a million dollars.
So, you know, but amongst mathematicians, I think the trouble is that we are so insulated
from society because it's such a pure subject. It draws in very specific psychological types.
And I can speak about myself. I did not realize it at the time, but later on, I definitely saw...
I mentioned some of it earlier, that for me, mathematics was a refuge from the cruelty of
the life I experienced, from discrimination that I experienced when I applied to Moscow University
at 16, being failed at the exam and stuff like that, which I describe in my book as well. But
that was my way. I was like, I don't trust this world. I don't want to deal with it.
I want to hide in this platonic reality of pure forms. This is where I know how to
operate. I love this, and I couldn't be bothered in some sense. For a while, up to a point, as I was
getting older and more mature, I was becoming more and more interested in other things. But I think
that's one of the reasons. And one of the reasons why I wrote Love and Math was precisely to break
that cycle. That it's the quiet guy in the corner that goes into math, and not the flamboyant, you
know, jock or like, you know, DJ. I wanted to show how beautiful the subject is to attract this new
blood so that different psychological types and more women would join. Because then they would
have the students who would look at them and whom they will inspire. And then it would be...
Instead of a vicious circle, it would be a virtuous circle. And I have to say, I think it's
happening not because of my efforts alone. Obviously, there are many other mathematicians
who are around the same time started to put more effort. Because see, if the old stereotype of
mathematician, you're so enclosed, you're not interested in even exposing the beauty of your
subject to other people, you see? And then it becomes this vicious circle. But you know, this
one day, you know, all the time I meet the students who say, your book is the reason why
I chose Math as my major. And I am proud, especially when it's women who tell me this.
And they are cool. They are DJs at the same time. And they are social. And they have friends.
And they go out and so on. You see, so then they carry the torch. Because then they will be more
likely to share this beauty with others, to attract more students and so on. So I think this
kind of this dumb was broken. So now you have more influx. And once we have people who are more
able to connect at the personal level, that's when we also become more self aware as a community,
I think. And that's when we might be, we should be able to have a chance to improve in terms of
our ethical rules and stuff like that. So let me return to our friend Eric Weinstein for a question
that I would ask anyway, but let me let's have a non Russian ask the Russian question.
Ask him about the Russian concepts of friendship, science, gender and love versus the American.
You can. So there is a there is a deep romanticism that you have
that runs to your book, Love and Math. Is part of that something you've picked up from the Russian
culture? What can you speak to that fueled both your fascination with math and your fascination?
No, your your prioritization of the human experience of love.
Good question. I definitely there is some influence of the Russian culture, Russian literature,
perhaps, you know, but also, you know, like, there's so many things. How do you how do we develop
certain sensibilities? Like, why do we care about this and not that? Like, why do I care, for instance,
about, like you said, about this romantic ideal, so to speak of mathematics? That's certainly not
something that is automatic. You know, some people care about some people don't. And I'm not saying
it is superior or inferior. It's just how my composition, my psychological composition is like
that. And it's an interesting question, like, what is the cause of it? So I think that
we cannot really know, but there are some aspects of it, of course, the experiences life experiences
are bringing family, like I was, you know, I was surrounded by love by my parents on the one hand,
but in the other side, perhaps they were a little overprotective of me. So I was kind of like, you
know, too much kind of like taking taking care of so then when I develop certain sensitivity,
but I was kind of not ready for the challenges of the real world of the real world. So then that
that struggle and that and then being lost and then being able to overcome and to learn. And
then if you do, you know, if you don't lose, you don't appreciate maybe, but sometimes when
we lose something and then regain it, then we cherish it, we appreciate and then becomes
unimportant. Also, various difficulties, you know, the upsetting experiences or one could say
traumatic experiences growing up, you know, in the Soviet Union, that was not a walk in the park,
you know, there were a lot of issues there that I had to go through. And and then it doesn't break
you make you stronger. But in my case, what happened was that, you know, some for some of it,
it took me 30 years to really come to terms with it and to really understand what happened.
It gave me this motivation to to strive to become a mathematician, which maybe I wouldn't
have otherwise it charged me supercharged me. I'm talking about, for instance, I experienced with
exam at Moscow University. Can you take me through that experience?
So this is 1984. We spoke about Orwell earlier. And I was applying to Moscow University
mathematics department called Mehmet, which is like for people who don't know, like the place
was the only place to study pure mathematics in Moscow period. But also, but also if you want
the great places on earth. And it's like a huge building, this, you know,
this monolith of a building of Moscow University. So because, as I said, you know, a year earlier,
Evgeniy Evgeniy, which converted me into math, capitalizing on my love for physics, quantum
physics. And so we spent a whole year studying with him. And I was really kind of at the level of,
you know, in some in some subjects, the level of like early graduate graduate studies.
So it seemed like it would be a breeze to get into Moscow University. But in fact, little did I know
that there was a policy of antisemitism where students like me would be failed by special
examiners, mostly during the oral exam with mathematics, but occasionally I would be written
tests and stuff. Now, my father is Jewish by blood. It was not religious. His family was not
religious. My mom is Russian. And but I was since my last name was my father's name. So it was very
easy to to read what my nationality was. And so there was this, can you imagine, there were
special people who would screen up applicants who would put aside the files of the undesirables.
There would be special examiners who were actually professors at this university
who would be designated as those who would take the exam from those undesirables.
It was it's almost comical when you look back now. And also like questions why there was no
reason other than just hatred of the other. That's how I see it. It's just to give a little bit
more color. So because you mentioned nationality, it's a little quirk that perhaps gives an insight
to the bigger system that the nationality listed on your birth certificate when you're Jewish is
Jewish. And when you're non-Jewish, is this as Russian for me, it was Russian. So first of all,
in the inner part, everybody has an internal passport. And there you have first name,
pateranemic name, last name, date of birth. So these are four. And the fifth colon is nationality,
which comes from the nationality of the parents and so on. In my case, it was written Russian
because my mom was Russian, but it didn't save me because I was my dad's last name.
And so anyway, this was the toughest experience that I had up until that point.
And there was this two people who came into the room where I was the only undesirable. All other
kids were being questioned by other examiners, but they told me that we cannot question you.
We are waiting for special examiners. So I was like, oh, oh, something is food. And so these
two guys came in four hours, basically, were asking me questions, which were not in the
program and so on. But I was like, yeah, I was 16 years old. I tried to answer it best I can,
but it was a setup. It's been documented since then, there are even lists of problems
that were given to undesirables in those days. In my year, no Jewish applicants,
as far as I know, Jewish by this metric were accepted. So then I had to go to this.
There was one technical school in Moscow, which was the Institute for Oil and Gas Exploration,
which had applied mathematics program. And that's where many of the kids who were not
accepted to Moscow University ended up. But the point is, and then I was so motivated by this,
because I wanted to show those guys that within five years, less than five years,
I got a letter from the president of Harvard University inviting me as a visiting professor
to Harvard. I was 21, I was barely 21, because I already did some research in the meantime.
That's how motivated I was. But the interesting aspect of it is that
for the longest time afterwards, I was telling myself a story that nothing really happened.
It wasn't so bad. Okay, so I was failed, but I knew that I was going to succeed.
It was 30 years later that I finally got to meet that boy, that 16-year-old.
That I neglected this time. And I realized that he died, that it was a crashing blow.
The innocence?
Not just the innocence, because there was no way. It looked like there was no way I could become
a mathematician, because if they don't accept me there, it's over. I didn't know that I could
actually find this striving applied math program, and then eventually somebody would take me under
his wing and so on, and then could move to the United States. That was not in the realm of
possibilities. So there was nothing to look forward to. It was clear that it's over. I cannot
do what I love. And so when I finally connected to that boy, oh my God, I was a totally different
experience. All the pain and all the trauma came to the surface. And it was a kind of a tsunami.
I wasn't sure I would survive this. It was so hard. And what happened was I was invited to
give a talk about this in New York. It was kind of a spoken word event
about science, but like personal experiences related to science. This was almost a year after
my book came out. In my book, one of the first chapters is a chapter about this experience.
But what I realize now is that I wrote it from the third person perspective.
I knew the facts, but I was not emotionally connected to that experience. However,
since I wanted to write the book and to connect to my readers, I allowed the boy to write it.
So a lot of people were touched by it, and people would say, wow, that chapter, you know,
it really got a lot of resonance. It was translated into another language even before the book was
published. I was surprised by this because I didn't know yet. So the adult Edward was not
yet in touch, but the book gave the outlet to the child. And that kind of started the process.
So finally, almost a year later, I'm in New York in this event. And the night before,
I'm in my hotel room, and I was like, okay, what am I going to talk about tomorrow?
And I take a piece of paper just to, you know, my usual preparation, you know, for things.
And then suddenly I have this vision that I will walk up to the microphone tomorrow,
and I will just start crying. And I was like, by that time, I already had an insight
that it's possible to have that kind of a splitting kind of dissociation. I was like,
but things were happening quickly. There was someone in my life who explained to me this idea
that some things are under the radar of awareness, but they may still influence you. And a lot of
that could be connected to some experiences in your childhood. So I was kind of ready for it
from different angles. But I was so surprised because I was like, what is there to remember?
I know, I know everything. So then my inner voice says, all right, then you have nothing to worry
about. Don't go tomorrow. And you will speak about this. And if you start crying, it's not a
problem. I was like, no, I don't want to cry in front of people. I want to find out what it is,
what happened. And I sit on my bed, close my eyes, and it came. So it's hard to describe. So this is
what the sheer energy of it and how much effort it took to suppress it actually for all these years,
how much effort it took to build that panzer, I wouldn't say in Russian, you know, that that
hardcore, you know, around myself. So that, and the thing, later I realized there were moments when
it could come out. And for instance, I developed this fear of public speaking, all kinds of little
things that I now feel were connected. So anyway, I saw what happened now through the eyes of that
child. I saw how difficult it was, how crushed he was. And it looked completely hopeless. And I
felt like, what's the point of living now for me, now that I know how cruel this world is,
which I didn't realize before, because I prefer to wear this pink, you know, the rose colored glasses.
But then something happened. It's so strange. It's like you feel that inside of you, there is
this dead child. And it is incredibly sad. I mean, it's like, I can't even describe it. But
suddenly he comes alive. And suddenly it's like, Oh, he's here. And I had a little talk with him.
And I said, look, you know, I know, I know, thank you, I'm so sorry that I neglected you for so long.
You know, I didn't know. Thank you for doing this. And it's almost like, you know, I felt like
the image came to mind is like a fallen soldier, like you leave a fallen soldier on the battlefield,
a wounded soldier. And then you come back to take him with you. And I said, but look,
look what we have done. Look at us now. It was not in vain. We are doing okay.
And it's kind of almost just like holding, holding, holding that child in that sense of who I am,
you know, and feeling it. So the next day, I went to the microphone, and I let him speak for the
first time about his experience in his own voice. It was incredible. People were crying and afterwards
came up to me and started sharing stories and so on. Because it is a story, it's a universal
story. It's archetypal story. It's the story of rejection and being treated unfairly.
We all know it. And I think it's so important to realize that it's, it's possible to revisit
those moments. It's possible to reconnect to our little ones. It's possible to bring them back.
And we are better for it because this changed my life, this experience. Then there were,
then suddenly it's like a floodgates that there were many other things that came.
That's when I became interested in the dimensions of imagination and intuition and so on. Because
suddenly I realized that I was deprived of those, of that possibility of looking at the world
through the eyes of a child because that child was frozen in time. I was not connected to him.
But suddenly he's with me. And he's like, almost like opens his doors and says, look at this.
So if I could ask you about, there's a difficult idea here. There's a tension. I've interacted
with a few folks in my personal life and in general that have lived through this experience
of unfairness and cruelty in the world as young people. And what wisdom do you draw from
the, the, the action you took of not acknowledging that you're a victim to cruelty, but instead
just working your ass off, working harder. And then this, the flip side of that is you
eventually reconnecting with the cruelty that you experienced. Because if you did that early on,
I was not ready for it. It is a defense mechanism. I could be, I could have come,
you know, there were kids who commit suicide after this experience. I could have committed
suicide because it's too much. And it is well known afterwards, of course, I became aware
of all the literature about childhood trauma and so on. And I have been, I've been speaking
publicly about it since then too. And so, you know, it is well known issue and well known
kind of universal phenomenon. I think that interesting enough, even though now I see a lot
of discussion of it, now that my eyes are open, but somehow before I didn't see it. So that,
which also shows you how our confirmation bias kind of like how we screen ourselves, how we turn
the blind eye to things which do not confirm our views or for which we are not yet ready. And by the
way, nobody should push to do it too soon. I'm glad I developed certain strengths. I was confident.
I was strong to withstand this. And if I weren't, who knows how it could turn out. So it is a very
subtle kind of alchemical process, which I don't think there is a recipe, there's a formula.
The reason I'm talking about this is just to share this experience, because I think that
the only thing we can do in this in some sense is to share with each other, because then we can find,
for instance, if somebody shared with me, it would naturally lead me maybe to get closer to that,
to kind of understanding. It's really just personal stories. It's not,
obviously, there is a, there is a component where professionals could be involved,
like professional therapists and so on. In my case, it somehow happened miraculously.
Well, I did have support, but not from professional therapists, but from like dear friends.
So I did, I did have, you didn't, you do need, I had somebody at the time who basically held my hand
and through this experience. Yes, it was invaluable and it could not be done otherwise.
So I think it's very common. And here's the thing,
I would not do it in any other way. When you, when I reconnected,
and I saw all the horrors and so on, but I also was able to see that my examiners were victims
of their own situation, that they became, they fell for this bogus
theories, or maybe it was more of a issue of career advancement or something. And I also
realized they must have suffered as well, because they must have had some kind of conciousness
of a conscience about it, that acting in this way towards sort of basically kids, you know.
So it's not, it wasn't pretty from their point of view. So I could forgive them
and I could like also appreciate what a, what a boost of energy it gave me.
If I was accepted and I was just where I was a first year student, I lived, I would live in a
dorm because I was in the, you know, I'd be probably partying and drinking and who knows what,
maybe I wouldn't even become a mathematician. But this focused me like a laser without me even
thinking about it. It just happened. I didn't care about anything but doing mathematics.
And it paid off, you know, it changed my life. So was it good or bad? Paradox.
Seems like life is full of those. You said you lost your father four years ago.
Yeah. What have you learned about life from your dad?
That's another big one. Yeah, because I was very close to him. And it was tough, it was tough.
And I was not, I was sort of not ready for it because up until that point I lived pretending
that death does not exist. When my grandparents died, I was already in the US. So it was very
convenient and I couldn't go back. So I grieved, but it kind of was a bit abstract for me. I didn't
see their dead bodies, you know, I didn't bury them and so on. So I waited till the
so the first death in my life was my father, like really close loved ones. And I was absolutely
devastated. You know, he was such an amazing creature, such an amazing human being. He was
the kindest, the smartest, the most funny, just really funny and just really fun to be with,
you know, this is what I miss, obviously. I mean, I would just love to hang out with him.
And then suddenly he's not there. So it's tough, but it kind of changed my perspective.
You miss him? I miss him tremendously. I miss him tremendously. But in a way,
I learned that he never left me in some sense. I mean, it sounds so, words are so, you know, like
they are, you could not express in words this, what I'm trying to say, but
Do you carry him with you? Yeah. But in some sense, I always did. And I saw that, that it's
always been, it was really, we were one in some sense, you know, like we were, but there was this
experience of two people being together and that I missed tremendously. But he gave me so much.
And I, you know, let me tell you one aspect of it, for instance, when he was a kid,
his father was sent to Gulag on bogus pretenses, right? So he, when he was 16,
he applied to a university. He wanted to become a theoretical physicist. By the way,
my love for theoretical physics was the large extent because of that. And he was not accepted,
even though he was brilliant, because he was the son of the enemy of the people. And he
kind of broke him this experience that he didn't care when he was, you know, he went to technical
school and he didn't really care. That's my take on it. And then he ended up in this, in this,
in this little provincial town and he thought he would escape from it as soon as possible.
And then he met my mother and they fell in love. And so I am sort of the product, the product of
that, you know, but then what I learned is that because he was not able to overcome that specific
experience, it felt to me to do it. And if I didn't, my son or my daughter would have, I think that
that was one of the things I learned that was not by chance that about the same age
for slightly different reasons. I was subjected to the same kind of unfairness and cruelty.
And I, in some ways, I feel like I did it for him also. I always, because he was also always so
proud of me. I was so happy. And I was, I had this tremendous gift twice. I was invited by American
mathematical society to give this big lectures twice. It was in 2012 and in 2018. And both times
they were in Boston. It could be anywhere in the US. Both times was in Boston, walking distance
from my parents' place. So he could be there in my mom as well. And that was such a gift that he
was beaming, you know, like seeing me on the stage. So, you know.
Now that he's no longer here and it's just you. Well, I still have my mom. I still have my sister.
Yeah. But as a man, there's some aspect that it's,
that it does hit you hard. Are you afraid of your own death? Do you think about your death?
Are you afraid of it? I have a certain conceptual view of life and death today,
which is informed by my experiences. In particular, going through my father's death.
And that is something which cannot be conceptualized. Like that experience, like you cannot
give it to somebody. One thing I will say is that I felt that what it was, it was actually love,
totally exposed, like naked. And you try to throw, it is so acute. So being facing that love
is incredibly painful because it's so intense. When a person is alive, we have conversation,
we have wars, we have some actions, we have some stuff is going on and it puts a filter.
So we rarely actually feel love in this totally, completely pure, unadulterated state.
But when a person dies, it's there. And it's staring at you. And no matter what you do,
you cannot turn away. Like, I tried to, it's like, almost I felt like I want to throw a blanket over
it. It burns, like immediately, like boom, gone. It's there. Live through it. And I was, I kept
saying to myself, just live through it, live through it. That's how you, and that's how you
know, also learn what is love, for example, what is it really? What is love? What is life also?
Because I was completely, I had no idea. And, and then you kind of learn that, okay, so maybe
it's not quite, there is more to it. There is more to it. There's more to this experience
than what can be put in a concept or in a, in a, in a sentence, in a, in a, maybe poetry or music
can do some justice to it. But if so, then my own life has that component, has that dimension,
which is beyond anything I can say about it, you know, and even though I love this being this,
playing this role, I love it. And I kind of, it kind of makes me feel different about all
kinds of difficulties that arise because it's almost like I want to enjoy it because that's
what being human is. It's being, it's being terrified. It's being frustrated. It's being
self-loathing sometimes. It's not knowing, but also being joyful and just like, ah, let's just
enjoy it. Kind of all of it, like that's why you came here for in some sense, you know, it's like
not trying to run away from things, but kind of trying to just live through them and appreciate.
So the biggest thing is gratitude in some sense. It's just gratitude. So thank you for letting me
play. It's gratitude for every single moment, even if it's dark, even if it's a loss. Yes. And
that's why I am so, people around me, they all say that it's a total doom and gloom and the world
is ending. And I'm like, first of all, that's how you see it. Okay. That's not the only point of
view, but also even if it is like, that's your challenge. Like, what are you going to do about
it? Stop complaining about other people. Do something yourself. How can you make it a better
world? You know. And I think all of that starts with just the gratitude for the moment to be able
to play this game. Yeah. How beautiful it is. What we've talked about love, but let me ask,
what role does love play in this whole game in the human condition? It's like the glue, you know,
it's like for me. And it's not because people say love is like for a human being, like a romantic
love, which is a huge component of it, obviously, because it's so, so beautiful to be able to
express it in this way. But it could be love for what you do for your passion for something, you
know, and, or, or love for, for your, for your friends, for instance, or love, it doesn't have to
be. And so in some sense, that's, that's what it's all about. And ultimately, because living without
love, it's kind of bland, boring. And so. And I don't think it's possible for science to explain
exactly what it is. You can do a evolutionary biology perspective, you can talk about some kind
of sociology perspective, psychology perspective, but the experience, the intensity where you forget
or time where reminded becomes an illusion, and everything just freezes. And then it's kind of
beautiful and painful to hear you say that when you experience love, the deepest is when you lost it.
Yes. But in a sense, you can say that you could not have one without the other. I could not have
that deep connection with my father, like really on so, so many levels. If there weren't a moment,
that's how I see it. And I'm not trying to say that's how everybody should see. For instance,
I respect Ray Kurzweil. I respect and I feel, and I almost like I feel good bumps right now. I feel
that desire to reconnect. Even if it is in the form of a, you know, a computer program, let's be
honest about it. I find it to be very moving. I find it very moving. And I understand because he
actually didn't have a chance to spend much time. You know, I think he was 16 or 17 when he was a
teenager. His dad died. I was lucky because my father died. I was much older. I've had so many
moments with him, but that's not my thing. Like, I think it is a feature. It's not a bug and it
sounds crazy. Like I would love, I would give anything to have him here right now. Right now,
everything I have, I give it away right now. Where do I sign? Just see him for one hour.
I promise you, I will. But I also know that then I'll still lose him or I will die or whatever.
You know, so that thing, so what is, why is it so worse to just hold on to holding on to it?
Why? Why are we holding on to this? And I am the first sucker. I'm the first one to hold on,
but I'm questioning it now. Like, is there another way to approach life where you just, you know,
how Buddha is like, just let it go. Enjoy and let it go. Enjoy and let it go. Is it possible?
Accept the paradox of it.
Well, ask me in a couple of years, you know, I will report. But I think that, but to my mathematical
mind, it sounds like a very interesting idea, to be honest. Because to me, the idea of holding
is, sounds like an impasse. Because no matter, in all my experience, and if you look in history,
every time somebody's holding, you know, is how they said in the matrix, whatever has a beginning
has an end. It's like, you cannot go around it. If you have a beginning, you will have an end.
So then might as well just enjoy it and not worry too much about extending it longer.
That's how I see it now. But maybe tomorrow will be something else.
Yeah, the roller coaster life, the paradox of life. In other words, you're an incredible human
being. I've been a fan for a long time. Thank you for writing love and math. Thank you. Thank you
for being who you are, being both one of the greatest living mathematicians and still
childlike wanderer of the exploring then how this whole world works, the nature of the universe.
And thank you so much for speaking with me today. This is amazing.
It's a pleasure. Thank you.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Edward Frankel. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words
from Sophia Kovalevska, a Russian mathematician. It is impossible to be a mathematician
without being a poet in the soul. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.